Farewell, old Scotia's bleak domains,
Vain rage! the mantle quits the conynge hand,
And one's own image from the bottom peep?
The sweetest hours that e'er I spend
For one whose palate gladdens in the flavour
Has oft been stretch'd to shield the honour'd land!
That place would prove a paradise when thou and Love were near.
Admir'd and prais'd--and there the homage ends:
His heart leapt up as to its rightful throne,
When round the tinkler prest her,
For on a silken couch of rosy pride,
Whene'er you look on it, 'tis plain
The life she had so tangled in her mesh:
Dismissed, again on open day I gazed,
Pay the Wolf homage? proffering lowly gaze
Why breathless, unable your bliss to declare?
An' dawtit, twal-pint hawkie's gaen
Her heathy moors and winding vales;
And offers bliss to give and to receive.
That goblet right heavy, and massy, and gold?
And over me the grass shall be smooth shaven;
Green-kyrtled Spring, flush Summer, golden store
What! could not Pluto spare the Chief once more,
She fled into that valley they pass o'er
For I no more shall wither, droop, and pine.
In depth of forest glade, when jocund June
We'll tent our flocks by Galla Water.
Trod on the trembling Senate's slavish mutes,
But now she's flouting down the Nith,
From envy or hatred your corps is exempt,
And fac'd grim danger's loudest roar,
Caught from the early sobbing of the morn.
Could figure out and to conception bring
And coverlids gold-tinted like the peach,
An' pray'd wi' zeal and fervour,
And buoyant round my limbs. At first I dwelt
Alas! there's ground o' great suspicion
So, nae reflection on your grace,
O state perplexing! On the pinion bed,
Young companies nimbly began dancing
Doth lesson happier men, and shames at least the bad.
Than mony scores as guid's the priest
When men display to congregations wide,
Into a warmer air: a moment more,
Some counsel unto me come len',
Without an echo? Then shall I be left
To possess but a span of the hour of leisure,
And Disappointment, in these lonely bounds,
Sweeps dams, an' mills, an' brigs, a' to the gate;
May he whose arms shall fauld thy charms
The fairest dame's in yon town,
To share our marriage feast and nuptial mirth?"
I love the muse that in her hand
Long ere the first loud trumpet's note is heard,
She furious stampt her shoeless foot aground,
The fatal gift of Beauty, which became
It is no goblin, 'tis no ghost,
They flourish like the morning flow'r,
And by that life, I'm promised mair o't,
Some spitefu' muirfowl bigs her nest,
May He, the friend of woe and want,
So, when I am in a voluptuous vein,
Of joy he might have felt. The spirit culls
From the poor girl by magic of their light,
But I maturely thought it proper,
The dew by fairy feet swept from the green,
He's blest--if, as he brew'd, he drink--
None came to guard me or to love.
And half forget what world or worldling meant.
But who wast thou, O happy, happy dove?
With laden sighs, and solemn-rounded sentence,
Was match for my John Highlandman.
From his companions, and set forth to walk,
My loveless eye unmoved may gaze on thee,
You're welcome to despots, Dumourier;
This list wi' my ain hand I wrote it,
Ye shall not wed for titles twice
But unto us she hath a spell beyond
Squire Hal besides had in this case
Since I saw thee, I have been wide awake
And many a maid from her mother shall tear.
And fairy-formed and many-coloured things,
Faint fare-thee-wells, and sigh-shrilled adieus!--
Duncan sigh'd baith out and in,
I stacher'd whyles, but yet took tent ay
Hersel' in beauty's bloom the while,
Each family of rapturous hurried notes,
To make her happy, when she thought of man.
Instead of thrones, hard flint they sat upon,
Ne city's towers pollute the lovely view;
That put me in an eerie swither;
Cauf-leather shoon upon your feet,
To stead thee as a verse in English tongue,
"The valiant, in himself, what can he suffer?
Hast soothed thine Idlesse with inglorious lays,
Still o'er the features, which perforce they cheer,
Sleep may be had in that deep den of all.
As by his noblest work, the Godhead best is known.
Depriv'd of thee, his life and light,
There's nought so fair on earth I see,
The songs of birds--the whisp'ring of the leaves--
Plunge in the pond again. The maids in haste
Do they occasion; 'tis a pleasing chime.
I cannot your light, mazy footsteps attend;
They're no sae wretched's ane wad think;
And love was ay between them twa.
Who shall delay her flight? And she must chaunt
Sae straught, sae taper, tight, and clean,
A tone of music--summer's eve--or spring--
Along that agéd venerable face,
To think how they may ache in icy hoods and mails.
Now views the column-scattering bay'net jar,
O Thou dread Power! whose Empire-giving hand
Or worthy friends rak'd i' the mools,
And heav'd on high my waukit loof,
'Twas right, said they, such birds to slay
Stedfast upon the matted turf he kept,
The drooping arts surround their patron's bier,
That we can yet feel gladdened by the Sun,
Not one hour old, yet of sciential brain
The same bright face I tasted in my sleep,
I love a youth of Corinth--O the bliss!
Stay, stay thy weary course, and let me lead,
'Twas Sleep slow journeying with head on pillow.
And thou shall view thy sons in crowds to Hades hurled.
For all unfit I feel my pow'rs to be,
On as we drove, the equinoctial deep
Nor shouts o' war that's heard afar--
It cools my blood; it cools my brain;
And, warrior, it nurtures the property rare
Among the stars in virgin splendour pours;
For moments few, a temperament as stern
Not _now_ in snow, which asks the lyric Roman's aid
Of petty power impelled, of those who wore
Stalks with Minerva's step where Mars might quake to tread.
How slow ye move, ye heavy hours,
I wad hae gi'en them off my hurdies,
And taste sic gear as Johnnie brews,
Did glitter in the yellow moon-beam! Well--
Be echoed swiftly through that ivory shell,
The wooden dishes round in haste are set,
The smile of love, the friendly tear,
Waking an Indian from his cloudy hall
Welcome the float of Thetis. Long he dwells
She had a rustic, woodland air,
Keen-shivering shot thy nerves along,
Before King Oberon's bright diadem,
The spring from the fountain now boils like a pot;
Where the bowed Waters meet him, and adore,
"God save thee, ancyent Marinere!
As hermits' beads by gentle floods,
_This_ made the ceaseless toil of travel sweet,
The clouds, swift-wing'd, flew o'er the starry sky,
On the cross roads, far from her friends and kin,
Drop into pleasant dreams; or musing lie,
Aye, those fair living forms swam heavenly
'Tis strange! he spake of you familiarly
In men who die.--This is the grief, O Son!
That he can even dream upon it thus!--
Were weel lac'd up in silken shoon,
Who begs a brother of the earth
The moon when daylight drops away,
"Which of themselves our minds impress,
Eyed them with joy from greatest to the least,
But rather, if her eyes could brighter be,
Each third step did he pause, and listen'd oft
The church is in ruins, the state is in jars;
Where's the voice, however soft,
After the Pilgrim in his wanderings,
Those pains of mine; O Saturn, hadst thou felt,
For try, poor thing, as often as she might,
Cluster'd around by all her starry Fays;
Is one of that complexion which seems made
And ay my Chloris' dearest charm,
Though scarcely half as big, demure and small,
For this is Love's recess, where vain men's woes,
He knew and said it was a quail's,
Fy, let us a' to Kirkcudbright,
Hung a lush scene of drooping weeds, and spread
Spring comes and goes and comes again
And dogs are ever in the way to watch
Or raised the venal voice of baser prostitutes.
Its little smoke, in pallid moonshine, died:
Is there no pity, no relenting ruth,
Then with a slow incline of his broad breast,
On heap'd up flowers, in regions clear, and far;
Pale warriors, death pale were they all;
Until, the breath of this corporeal frame,
Sir, o'er a gill I gat your card,
Where childish sport was stringing beads;
At a touch sweet Pleasure melteth
He's danc'd awa wi' the Exciseman!
The summer like a stranger comes,
I saw thine eyes, yet nothing fear'd,
And nature hides her face while they're sweeing in their chains
Poor tenant bodies, scant o' cash,
O mony a knight, and mony a laird,
Why thou art desolate, can e'er return.
Upon the sides of Latmos was outspread
Egeria! thy all heavenly bosom beating
For whom my warmest wish to Heaven is sent!
Or art, impossible! a nymph of Dian's,
Of the horse that the miller had brought to be shod,
At once 'tis music--and 'tis love.
And streaking here and streaking there,
There's Jockie and the hav'rel Jenny,
Or trots by hazelly shaws and braes,
The tunefu' powers, in happy hours,
An' scattered cowslips sweetly spring;
And she--as fairest is her form!
And laughing hurry in to keep them dry.
Look'd on the fading yellow woods
And Eden scenes on crystal Jed,
There's scarce a new herd that we get
Through shaven grass and many a border,
Pour'd on his hair, they all mov'd to the feast
She could ca' us nae waur than we are,
But could I gather from the wave-worn store
An' ne'er, tho' out of sight, to jauk or play:
And lovely Una in a leafy nook,
And all that to herself she talked,
Or known your kindness, what might I have been?
Feel palpitations when thou lookest in:
To the cell where the convict is laid.
I'm thine at ane-and-twenty, Tam.
And a green grassy hillock hides his head;
There's Gaun,  miska't waur than a beast,
What! shall reviving Thraldom again be
Were lifted from the water's breast, and faun'd
Nine fathom deep he had follow'd us
Who would set the mob aboon the throne,
That man shall flourish like the trees
Since Merlin paid his Demon all the monstrous debt.
What! dost thou move? dost kiss? O bliss! O pain!
Appear along the moonlight road,
To sell her poor Jenny for siller an' lan'!
That never care to drop a crumb.
Full beautiful, a faery's child,
The nympholepsy  of some fond despair--
In which whales arbour close, to brood and sulk
But my white pow, nae kindly thowe
The wreck of old opinions--things which grew,
The orphans of the heart must turn to thee,
An' there will be roarin' Birtwhistle,
Of Art and its great Masters, who could raise
Too many doleful stories do we see,
The Bucentaur  lies rotting unrestored,
Of thunder, or of Jove. Great Saturn, thou
By tenderest pressure, a faint damask mouth
Straight the sky grew black and daring;
Lovely the moon in ether, all alone:
Ah! thou hast been unhappy at the change
An' tak the counsel I sall gie thee,
Ah! Duncan, ye're an unco loon--
An' darker gloaming brought the night:
Or shootin' o' a hare or moor-cock,
As rots into the souls of those whom I survey.
Nor could on earth a spot be found
Without one impious word, himself he flings,
More full of visions than a high romance?
I think on him that's far awa',
In strength to bear what Time can not abate,
And o'er the crystal streamlet plays;
With leaves stuck in them; and the Neptune be
Richer entanglements, enthralments far
The weary shearer's hameward way;
She fled me swift as sea-bird on the wing,
That ance were plush, o' guid blue hair,
To lay some mair below my head.
And human frailties, were forgotten quite:
You must take care and chuse your time
Like the first of a thunder-shower; and now
For of this pony there's a rumour,
When frae her thou hast parted,
To confound the poor Doctor at ance.
To hunt for food, and be a naked man,
And all around each eye's sepulchral cell
Thou art the Garden of the World, the Home
Of green or silvery bower doth enshrine
Say, to be just, and kind, and wise,
Edg'd round with dark tree tops? through which a dove
To where he towered on his eminence.
In spite o' a' the thievish kaes,
Where the rushes fringe the spring, bonny Mary O!
And hear him curse the light he first survey'd,
The black'ning trains o' craws to their repose:
I lived upon the mercy of the fields,
Or women, sonsie, saft an' sappy,
The ambrosial aspect, which, beheld, instils
But that he met Enceladus's eye,
Bold, soldier-featur'd, undismay'd
Gruff with contempt; which a death-nighing moan
As breezeless lake, on which the slim canoe
Some rouse the patriot up to bare
A natural sermon o'er their pebbly beds;
Is naething but a "moonshine matter;"
Here stands a shed to fend the show'rs,
The sun was just a-rising above the heath of furze,
And still the eloquent air breathes-burns with Cicero!
On Yarrow banks the birken shaw;
"And the sun did shine so cold."
Delighted me to hear thee sing,
From Power's high pinnacle, when they have felt
An' clear the consequential sorrows,
Us young immortals, without any let,
But in the milder grief of pity.
Grief born of thee, young angel! fairest thief!
Till a faint dawn surpris'd them. Glaucus cried,
Rash mortal, and slanderous Poet, thy name
How dying I shall kiss that lily hand.--
The herd approach'd; each guest, with busy brain,
Let wark an' hunger mak' them sober!
So that, in moments few, she was undrest
It's plenty beets the luver's fire.
Why this fair creature chose so fairily
No fabled tortures, quaint and tame:
See, not one tree but what has lost its leaves--
Homeward drag the rumbling roll;
And from the muddy pond fly up and wheel
But thought I may hae waur offers, waur offers,
With their own hopes, and have been vanquished, bear
But monie a day was by himsel',
The mind that is within us, so impress
And don't despise your betters cause they're old.
That proudly cock your cresting cairns!
Delighted doubly then, my Lord,
And by another, in deep dell below,
O had I ne'er seen thee, my Phely!
Fall'n beneath the dockyard strokes,
His petty hope in some near port or bay,
The region; nor bright, nor sombre wholly,
Many familiar with his well-sung woes,
The grave of France, the deadly Waterloo!
Had I a man's fair form, then might my sighs
High as the handles heap'd, to suit the thought
To every New Light  mother's son,
While Common-Sense has ta'en the road,
The breeze that waves a flower.
The cliffs and peaks so high that are,
When I think of Jerusalem in kingdoms yet free,
Tell me what thou wouldst have been?
Who dwells and revels in thy glassy deeps;
Blush'd into roses 'mid his golden hair,
Draw near with pious rev'rence and attend!
And each well known caprice of wave and wind;
The soothing peace of morning's early hours:
And I quak'd to think of my own voice
They came like Truth--and disappeared like dreams;
It seem'd as when around the pale new moon
Had I e'er seen her from an arbour take
E'en mony a plack, and mony a peck,
This life has joys for you and I;
Of heaven ambrosial; and we will shade
The field thou hast won, by yon bright god of day!"
He spake, and walking to that aged form,
I bit my arm and suck'd the blood
With future rhymes, an' other times,
--I asked him whither he was bound, and what
And thus to Betty's question, he
Of neck and shoulder, nor the tenting swerve
Emprison her soft hand, and let her rave,
And moisture, that the bowery green may live:
Whyles owre a linn the burnie plays,
Or whether, rapt in meditation high,
In his hands for a burster--but devil a bit
To loathsome vaults, where heart-sick anguish toss'd,
God cursed me in my sore distress,
However deeply in men's spirits skilled,
Good L--d, what is man? for as simple he looks,
His eye glanced at the white-nosed bee;
An' wander'd through the bow-kail,
That fortune's scale should to my sorrow turn,
He could not help but kiss her: then he grew
That e'er he nearer comes oursel
He rives his father's auld entails;
And reaching fingers, 'mid a luscious heap
Is emptied of this folk, this pious morn?
But fegs, the Session says I maun
Forbids me e'er to see her mair!
Tripp'd lightly on, in sort of deathful glee;
So shy, grave, and distant, ye shed not a tear:
It levelled every bush and tree and levelled every hill
And still more, later flowers for the bees,
From man to the sun's God; yet unsecure:
With airy images, and shapes which dwell
Show'd her pale cheeks, and all her forehead wan,
Than heaven-illumined man on brother man bestows;
And by and by, like heath-bells gilt with dew,
Pursuing Fortune's slidd'ry ba',
Battle to the swollen billow-ridge, and drave
And, pledging aft to meet again,
Walk'd towards the temple grove with this lament:
We'll o'er the water and o'er the sea,
Art thou not cruel? Ever have I striven
Hung from his shoulder like the drooping flowers
A thousand years scarce serve to form a state;
But, when at last I breath'd my flame,
Sure I will not believe thou hast such store
The distant Cumnock hills out-owre:
The simmer had been cauld an' wat,
'Mong which it gurgled blythe adieus, to mock
But God confound their stubborn face,
Wi' virls and whirlygigums at the head.
Laocoön's  torture dignifying pain--
And they are dead, and I will die.
Think, think, how you will bear it.
Her many griefs for _One_; for she had poured
And canst thou leave me thus for pity?
When, presently, the stars began to glide,
May Heaven augment your blisses,
And humming scraps his father sung before,
Four cavaliers prepare for venturous deeds,
The warld's wrack we share o't,
Where Rome embraced her heroes?--where the steep
Within whase bosom, save despair,
An' sweet an' gracefu' she did ride,
How have the raptur'd moments flown!
Awakening up, he took her hollow lute,--
Stifled his voice, and puls'd resolve away--
Of wreathed silver: sumptuous they stand
Left by men-slugs and human serpentry,
Of future bliss, enrol thy name:
Laugh in Misfortune's face--the beldam witch!
When with her load she turned about,
And keenly felt the friendly glow,
He was not in wedlock, thank heav'n, but in hell;
Bonnie laddie, Highland laddie;
Lord, bless thy chosen in this place,
And she wad send the sodger youth,
Who hang so fiercely on the flying Gaul,
Despising worlds with all their wealth
On such as wield her weapons; he had kept
Till the silent moon shine clearly;
O, all ye pow'rs who rule above!
While frighted rattons backward leuk,
Gie me within my straining grasp
And made her poor old bones to ache,
'Twas Jove's--'tis Mahomet's--and other Creeds
Sad case, as you may think, for one
The least one to the stranger growls "bow wow,"
There is no other crime, no mad assail
To praise the thorn, white over then with May;
It is enough in sooth that _once_ we bore
Give me that voice again, my Porphyro,
This pond and beauteous hill of moss,
But in the self-same fixed trance he kept,
The Johnstones hae the guidin' o't,
And friendly faces absent many a year
And stroan't on stanes and hillocks wi' him.
And fast the white rocks faded from his view,
It was her een sae bonnie blue.
The brothers' faces in the ford did seem,
And edged our chairs up closer to the fire,
And while my heart wi' life-blood dunted
Play with their fingers, touch their shoulders white
Blendeth its odour with the violet,--
Nor let my mother have so much to blame
Says--I'll be wed, come o't what will;
The speedy gleams the darkness swallow'd;
To little birds that flirt and start away.
But Peggy, dear, the ev'ning's clear,
And all went merry as a marriage bell;
Ye maist wad think a wee touch langer
Turn up their silver lining to the sun,
Now, Jove, for once be mighty civil,
With an eye-guess towards some pleasant vale
Of youth and beauty should be thrown aside
An' there, frae the Niddisdale borders,
Yourself, you wait your bright reward.
We'll sing auld Coila's plains an' fells,
The particle of those sublimities
Load to misery most distressing,
Some fire the soldier on to dare;
All that he writes with such a hurrying glow.
Conspiring with him how to load and bless
Here brewer Gabriel's fire's extinct,
Disturb not ye the hero's sleep,
This, all its source and end to draw;
Now in her green mantle blythe nature arrays,
Or reekin' on a new-year morning
The short night weary with their fretting song.
England! I joy no child he was of thine:
I shall roll on the grass with two-fold ease:
We liv'd full one-and-twenty years
Came jasper pannels; then, anon, there burst
Redemption sparkles!--I am sad and lost."
His friend, inspirer, guardian, and reward!)
And auld Mess John will mend the skaith,
Tho' wafting o'er the flowery spring,
What marvel if I thus essay to sing?
He leant, wretched. He surely cannot now
Brave is this Bumtagg, match him if you can;
Are not a spoil for him,--thou dost arise
No wain they drove, and yet, the yellow sheaf
Her resurrection; all beside--decay.
Yon murky cloud is foul with rain,
His own particular fright, so these three felt:
Nor let thy votary's hope be deemed an idle vaunt.
All hail thy palaces and tow'rs,
What leaf-fring'd legend haunts about thy shape
That fierce complain to silence: while I stumbled
The old dog snaps and grins nor ventures nigh.
He came to guard me every night.
A heavenly silence did the waves invest;
Still, still pursues, where'er I be,
Ancient of days! august Athena! where,
Found ourselves ruling new and beauteous realms.
One sacred Right of Woman is protection.
D'ye mind that day, when in a bizz,
The woodcock haunts the lonely dells;
That I am wise, that Pallas is a dunce--
And fiendish faces one, two, three,
Sweet flow'ret, pledge o' meikle love,
For our remembrance, and from out the plain
For her too scanty once of room!
One glance did fully all its secrets tell;
With spades they would have sought.
With green spreading bushes, and flowers blooming fair!
Ah me! in sooth he was a shameless wight,
And I switched at the flies as I sat all alone
That joined your names with mine! O my sweet lady,
Hear'st thou the groans that rend his breast?
Thou know'st not, reck'st not to what region, so
'Mid that long sickness, and those hopes deferr'd,
And coy bumbarrels twenty in a drove
Good without effort, great without a foe;
My awkart muse sair pleads and begs,
To breathlessness, and suddenly a warm
That he who there at such an hour hath been
Verse deals in fancy, so he sticks to prose.
And, jee! the door gaed to the wa';
Had I not filed my mind, which thus itself subdued.
His spreaded feathers to the morrow chill,
Yet is she free? the Spoiler's wished-for prey!
Their horses homeward, with convulsed spur,
Thou frownest, and old Eolus thy foe
And o'er the thairms be tryin';
It is that weariness which springs
Nor virgin-choir to make delicious moan
That's slept half an eternity; in fear
Of beechen green, and shadows numberless,
But breathless, as we grow when feeling most;
To sacrifice to Jove, whose temple there
But govern not thy pettiest passion, nor,
Ere half this region-whisper had come down,
She has gotten a coof wi' a claute o' siller,
"Is it he?" quoth one, "Is this the man?
"Or when the deep green-mantled earth
Had shor'd them with a glimmer of his lamp,
"The first that died was little Jane;
The young lambs ran a pretty race;
Descend, ye chilly, smothering snows!
A Highland lad my love was born,
There's not a bonnie flower that springs
O'er yon bank and o'er yon brae,
And thretty gude shillin's and three;
To such the gladness of the gamesome crowd
I've heard the scarlet moss is red
Stern Alaric and Havoc on their way?
In days when daisies deck the ground,
And many once proud-quiver'd loins did melt
For wine we left our heath, and yellow brooms,
Where staring malice never comes.
Many the wonders I this day have seen:
The misery his brilliance had betray'd
Nymph of the downward smile, and sidelong glance,
Made delicate from all white-flower bells;
She fretted for the golden hour, and hung
The deil's awa wi' the Exciseman;
But when thou pours thy strong heart's blood,
Squire Pope but busks his skinklin patches
We twa hae paidl't i' the burn,
But a royal ghaist wha ance was cas'd
Both what to follow, what to shun,
An' meikle Greek and Latin mangled,
Revive, dear youth, or I shall faint and die;
He's on the seas to meet the foe?
Arm! Arm! it is--it is--the cannon's opening roar!
They alway must be with us, or we die.
Come then, wi' uncouth, kintra fleg,
His tattered clothes, that scarcely screen the back,--
The first of bards in all the world with him,
Skilled in the ogle of a roguish eye,
Ah! happy years! once more who would not be a boy?
The wanderer by moonlight? to him bringing
Hither most gentle sleep! and soothing foil
And throned Eternity in icy halls
Me, dear Endymion, were I to weave
But ever since I heedlessly did lave
Because ye're surnam'd like his Grace;
"When youthful love, warm-blushing, strong,
Thought I, I am as thin as air--
No reveller had ever dipp'd a chin
Thy deathful bow against some deer-herd bent,
The red-breast known for years, which at my casement peck'd.
Thine own fair bosom, and I am so near!
Then felt I like some watcher of the skies
Our pins at blindfold on the wheel we stuck,
That vile doup-skelper, Emperor Joseph,
Gilds the bright summit of some gloomy cloud;
Wha for Scotland's king and law
Of thy honied voice; the neatness
When holy were the haunted forest boughs,
To whisper pleasing fancies in her ear;
Thou Tomb! and other days come back on me
Gathering her brows like gathering storm,
Are mind't in things they ca' balloons,
Mankind is a science defies definitions.
Ye'd better taen up spades and shools,
Will sooner hatch up lies than mend their clothes;
O, Moodie, man, and wordy Russell,
Feels not the wheels run oer his head,
That sense and worth, o'er a' the earth,
In that sweet mood when pleasant thoughts
Their likeness is not found on earth, in air, or sea.
If aught that's kindred cheer the welcome hearth;
Death levels all things in his march;
And he had a wife was the plague o' his days;
For ever piping songs for ever new;
Then hide me from the shower, a short sojourn,
That led th' embattled Seraphim to war."
To shool her knitting out at night,
The thing was vile with green and livid spot,
A senseless lump of animated clay--
And stoop for flowers, and shout for joy.
Still onward; still the splendour gradual swell'd.
For every mouth knew Jenny died with child;
To see herself escap'd from so sore ills,
The rattling show'rs rose on the blast;
O, dool on the day I met wi' an auld man!
On high--where Pallas linger'd, loth to flee
A coward, did my very eye-lids wink
The suns of twenty summers danced along,--
Each volley tells that thousands cease to breathe;
Like Spirits of the spot, as 'twere for fame.
Full on the alarmed beauty of the bride,
Nor may I be thy love. We might commit
The owl, for all his feathers, was a-cold;
"And now I'm in the world alone,
"My little boy, which like you more,"
Uprisen o'er chaos: and with such a stun
With passions fiercer, yet a judgment cold,
Heart's lightness from the merriment of May?--
Altho' his pouch o' coin were clean,
And make a vast monopoly of hell?
As the sky-searching lark, and as elate.
They scarcely left to co'er their fuds,
And fain would utter what it can't repeat,
That equal transports move her?
Was there a nook in which the world had never been to sear,
To see him seek morn's airy couch to sing,
By their new vigour, sternly have they dealt
May Kennedy's far-honour'd name
There I'll despise imperial charms,
And even out-Irish his Hibernian bronze;
Near many a hermit-fancy'd cove,
Stubborn'd with iron. All were not assembled:
And prune its horseshoe-circled breast,
My ashes in a soil which is not mine,
Beheld awake his very dream: the gods
The martial phosphorus is taught to flow,
The harpy, hoodock, purse-proud race,
Her dream, with feast and rioting to blend;
Comes trinkling down her swan-white neck;
The snaw-drap and primrose our woodlands adorn,
The auld guidman raught down the pock,
Upon my car a noisy nothing rings--
And while the wild horse gives its head a toss,
He'll clap a shangan on her tail,
To grace the lad, her weel-hain'd kebbuck, fell,
Crown'd with green leaves, and faces all on flame;
The game shall pay o'er moor an' dale,
These things accomplish'd:--If he utterly_
His fabled golden tribute  bent to pay;
There'll never be peace till Jamie comes hame.
And ere they clap the gate she tosses up
But man, to whom alone is giv'n
We'll search through the garden for each silly flower,
And gild the distant mountain's brow;
My daughter! with thy name thus much shall end!--
O Jove! I shall be young again, be young!
I red ye weel, take care o' skaith,
When first Spain's queen beheld the black-eyed boy,
And weave them dyingly--send honey-whispers
Their lustres with the gloomier tapestries--
And a stiver I've found when I thought I'd got none;
Again I seize the theme, then but begun,
Their talk in every maiden's ear,
'Twill be to be forgiven--or suffer what is just.
With wine, in honour of the shepherd-god.
Was threshin' still at hizzies' tails;
These hedge-rows, hardly hedge-rows, little lines
The cowslip blossom, with its ruddy streak,
And here's to them we dare na tell,
Brews good ale at shore o' Bucky
This scrap of land he from the heath
O had I power like inclination,
His solid sense--by inches you must tell.
"Till God released her of her pain,
Or--it might be--a Beauty of the earth,
"Dwell near them with my mother."
O ye wha are sae guid yoursel',
We from to-day, my friend, will date
"Then," cried the young Endymion, overjoy'd,
Which seems a sense of joy to yield
O, for a draught of vintage! that hath been
Suddenly on the ocean's chilly streams.
Her looks were like a flow'r in May,
For Daring made thy rise as fall: thou seek'st
With sobbing ebbs, and uproar gathering high;
Prepared and spread the plenteous board within;
An' wight, an' wilfu' a' his days been.
My Chloris, mark how green the groves,
Gae somewhere else, and seek your dinner
Close in a bower of hyacinth and musk,
That skims, or dives, or sleeps, 'twixt cape and cape.
O Poesy! for thee I hold my pen
Her rushing wings--Oh! she who was Almighty hailed!
Pearled with dew like fishes' eyes,
Mark the bright silver curling round her prow.
I well remember.--He was one who own'd
Awaken, ye breezes, row gently, ye billows,
The warl' may play you monie a shavie;
And then there's something in her gait
To whom the shadows of far years extend:
And where the marjoram once, and sage, and rue,
Thy strength without--while all within was mute.
It's true, they needna starve or sweat,
He only hears and sees the war,
A case that's still too common,
Nor Insolence assumes fair Freedom's name;
My soul to keep in its resolved course."
Each with large dark blue wings upon his back.
And self-conceited critic skellum
Each minute sweeter than before,
Wi' his teethless gab and Ma auld beld pow,
But weel the watching lover marks
There ruminating neath some pleasant bush,
These lures I straight forget,--e'en ere I dine,
But tho' fell fortune should fate us to sever,
But few have ever felt how calm and well
"Sir! I am going many miles to take
When all is won that all desire to woo,
All levelled like a desert by the never weary plough,
The tender flower that lifts its head, elate,
Not to show her respect, but to save the expense.
The Latmian saw them minish into nought;
The friend of Petrarch--hope of Italy--
Soon, trembling in her soft and chilly nest,
Where strumpets, relics of the drunken roar,
Shine on thee in thy solitary walk;
Her tongue and eyes, her dreaded spear and darts;--
Walks forth to worship, not to spoil,
Uptorn, must bear the hyæna bigot's wrong,
And fought and conquered, and the same course steered,
Who go to Corinth from Cenchreas' shore;
Then here contented will I lie;
Its steady dyes, while all around is torn
A wit in folly, and a fool in wit?
Of Zephyr slew him,--Zephyr penitent,
As long as aught was worthy to pursue:
Daubed all about as if besmeared with blood,
I know my need, I know thy giving hand,
Her corn, and wine, and oil--and Plenty leaps
There'll never be peace till Jamie comes hame.
Where the raven croaked loud like the ploughman ill-bred,
Thou, who thy honour as thy God rever'st,
Endymion awoke, that grief of hers
Crystal streamlets gently flowing,
That God poor Susan's life would spare,
The vacant Gallery now seemed made in vain,
This sting is added--'Blame thy foolish self!'
If he that rhymeth now may scribble moe.
Pity the tuneful muses' hapless train,
And now beneath the with'ring blast
Again ye'll charm the ear and e'e;
Bleed gladiator-like, and still engage
This truth fand honest Tam O' Shanter,
She's down in the yard, she's kissin' the laird,
After some warm delight, that seems to perch
Blest be the wild, sequester'd shade,
Alas! it's no thy neebor sweet,
Their fate we should na censure,
He found a weary fox and beat him out.
Were strewn rich gifts, unknown to any Muse,
He roar'd a horrid murder-shout,
And that same pond of which I spoke,
This grove is wild with tangling underwood,
To one so friendless the clear freshet yields
And roused the vengeance blood alone could quell;
Below the fatt'rells, snug an' tight;
And pulled at the quart, till the snob he declared
And anxiously began to plait and twist
O I do think that I have been alone
And from the planks, far shattered o'er the rocks,
By all the trembling mazes that she ran,
That is the top of sovereignty. Mark well!
With woe I nightly vigils keep,
Owre many a weary hag he limpit,
Oh! tell me whither--for no earthly friend
Tho' matching beauty's fabled queen,
But soaring snow-clad through thy native sky,
From thy sea-foamy cradle; or to doff
Come bumpers high, express your joy,
The falchion flash, and o'er the yet warm dead
Come to the earth; with an incline so sweet
Daisies upon the sacred sward last eve,
And back retir'd; not cool'd by high disdain,
And at Dumblane, in my ain sight,
And still my delight is in proper young men;
These waters, rolling from their mountain-springs
Sprang to each other madly; and the rest
What care I in riches to wallow,
O whistle, and I'll come to you, my lad,
Swiftly I mount, upon wide spreading pinions,
Now over them he goes with hasty trip,
For prayin' I hae little skill o't;
O Thou, the first, the greatest friend
Till I found the pleasure past and a winter come at last,
He throws his basket down to climb the tree
Seems all this poor endeavour after fame,
Through night's black depths in danger's garb arrayed.
What makes heroic strife, fam'd afar?
These crystalline pavilions, and pure fanes,
Its gathering waves--ye felt it not. The blue
Or fallen stars in a green sea of grass.
And thunder yet with louder call,
Low murmurer of tender lullabies!
And terrors manifold divided me
Of that loved village where he left his sheep
I knew not where I met her, I was strange to the place.
It's good to support Caldonia's cause,
How many a doubtful day shall sink in night,
Pastures tracked deep with cows,
Blest wi' content, and milk and meal--
Yet all is still within and desolate.
The lad I love's the lad for me,
Cowering their tawny brushes. Silent sails
And raiment shadowy of each wind's embrace,
Sat Legislation's sov'reign pow'rs!
An' cheat like onie unhang'd blackguard.
Who shall say that fortune grieves him
And glides into a bed of water lillies:
My mind may lose its force, my blood its fire,
Love, meet me in the green glen,
Have I not had my brain seared, my heart riven,
That ilka melder, wi' the miller,
And now and then, it must be said,
Clamours with dismal tidings of the rain,
Then let me range by Cassillis' banks,
How many days! what desperate turmoil!
Thee, fam'd for martial deed and sacred song,
Helpless, must fall before the blasts of fate,
Sincere as a saint's dying prayer.
And laid my hand upon thy mane--as I do here.
The o'erwhelming sweets, 'twill bring to me the fair
Wheel downward come they into fresher skies,
Whose end and aim is doing good,
By autumn wild, and winter rude!
Where, choaked in flags and sedges, wandering slow,
And near him rode Silenus on his ass,
Of health and holy feeling can provide
May'st thou long, sweet crimson gem,
Or if thy mistress some rich anger shows,
May secrecy round be the mystical bound,
No kin they bear to labour's drudgery,
Sup and bowse from horn and can.
Not far from pleasant Ivor-hall,
Little trotty wagtail, you nimble all about,
While clombe above the Eastern bar
When the stars twinkle through the loops of Time,
And back returneth, meagre, barefoot, wan,
A Cherub-Hydra round us dost thou gape,
The loudest still the Tempest leaves behind;
Sma' need has he to say a grace,
A moment catching at a surer breath,
"Know, the great genius of this land,
I scarce get as far as the eaves;
Near to a cypress grove, whose deadly maw,
"My Johnny, till my dying day."
Five hundred white pence I'll gie you,
An' cheese an' bread, frae women's laps,
"Beneath my palm trees, by the river side,
It is a thing I dote on: so I'd fain,
Round every isle, and point, and promontory,
Loiter'd around us; then of honey cells,
Doth Tayo interpose his mighty tide?
But I hae try'd this border-knight,
Though their days have hurried by
The melancholy crow--in hurry weaves,
He sought her east, he sought her west,
To those that walk in darkness: on the sea
Loves in its clumps to make a home
It is no tale; but should you think,
And fettered thousands bore the yoke of war,
So graceful, that it seems no mortal hand,
What of earls with whom you have supt,
Before he went into his quiet cave
By which he took his first soft poppy dream;
And grateful science heaves the heart-felt sigh!
And then their failings, flaws, an' wants,
But he wad hecht an honest heart,
Where dewdrops pearl the wood blue bells
But there are higher ones I may not see,
And neer forgets those prickly heads
The pigeons from the dove cote cooed over the old lane,
In this strange land, this uncouth clime,
Till the old grunting badger passes bye.
Comes hostin', hirplin', owre the field,
To shrive from Man his weight of mortal sin,
At kirk, or at market, whene'er ye meet me,
An old man sitting calm and peacefully.
So in fine wrath some golden sounds he won,
"I've seen sae mony changefu' years,
From this too oft deluded breast!
The dogs sit on their haunches near the pail,
And so for gain, that joy's repay,
With one sensation, and those wakeful Birds
But not an eye can find its way to see.
Chords that vibrate sweetest pleasure,
Comparing, joyfully, their plenteous stores
Floated into the room, and let appear
Her never-weaned, though not her favoured child.
Ah! little marked, how fast they rolled away:
That anguish comes and makes me tell
Paint Vengeance as he takes his horrid stand,
Who is so rash as rise in rebel arms?
Or dost thou dread the billows' rage,
And merry in our meadows? How is this?
And other sheep from her I raised,
Nae mair by Babel's streams we'll weep,
The dogs are clapt and urged to join the fray;
With her most starry canopy --and seating
There solid self-enjoyment lies;
All ashes to the taste: Did man compute
The soul is lost in pleasant smotherings:
But now thy flow'ry banks appear
To change; her elfin blood in madness ran,
The way my friends their course did bend,
Confuse their brains in college classes!
Or whare wild-meeting oceans boil
A pigeon tumbling in clear summer air;
And dear was she I dare na name,
It breaks my bliss--it breaks my heart.
And others, I've heard many swear,
From this green earth; of all the mighty world
Which shows a distant prospect far away
My father pat me frae his door,
Their measure of content; what merest whim,
The worship of the place, or the mere praise
"I'm wearied," said fair Lamia: "tell me who
The hunter lo'es the morning sun,
"Arise, good youth, for sacred Phœbus' sake!
That makes the heavens be mute.
The many that are come to pay their vows
Desist! or my offended mistress' nod
Streams like the thunder-storm _against_ the wind;
And monarchs gazed and envied in the hour
And passer-bye along the level rows
O for a beaker full of the warm South,
It's no thro' terror of damnation;
Her eye-brows have a rusty stain,
What is a lordship's pomp? a cumbrous load,
Soon with an eagle nativeness their gaze
Grave these counsels on thy soul.
And light the Laurels on a loftier head!
We lay our hearts before thee evermore--
And gratefully, my guid auld cockie,
She feels a love for little things
Where she doth breathe!" "Bright planet, thou hast said,"
Of living Valour, rolling on the foe
While in those warm and lovely veins the fire
The lanes I sought, and as the sun retired,
Their gestures nimble, dark eyes flashing free,
Is of another temper, and I roam
When well-form'd taste and sparkling wit unite,
I crossed my native fields, where the scarlet poppies grew,
And soft adorings from their loves receive
The yellowhammer loves to find.
Nae snap conceits, but that sweet spell
Alone and sad. No, I will once more raise
And try across the deepest place to float:
Who had their ears to hear might understand,
When wearing through the afternoon,
And this poor thorn they clasp it round
And had sae fortified the part,
So in they hurried all, maz'd, curious and keen:
Impossible to melt as iced stream:
Tnou'st heard the knave, abusing those in power,
Thy city in ruins, thy kindred deplored,
The deil he could na scaith thee,
What must be done? what will betide?
And the host laughed aloud as his sides they would crack
While she held the goblet sweet,
My periods that deciphering defy,
O thou in whom we live and move,
Thrice tapped her box, and pinched, and thus began.
The land which loved thee so that none could love thee best.
Imperishably pure beyond all things below.
I wad be laith to rin an' chase thee,
The rustic bard, the lab'ring hind,
Shows not her sleeve of grey to know her bye.
Endymion!" said Peona, "we are here!
So may thro' Albion's farthest ken,
That's half so sweet as thou art.
I'll cross him, and wrack him, until I heart-break him,
Their humble slave, an' a' that;
I was na fou, but just had plenty;
Childless and crownless, in her voiceless woe;
Of brightness so unsullied, that therein
Had not yet lost those starry diadems
Care-untroubled, joy-surrounded,
With heart just like a feather, now as heavy as a stone;
In the dusk heavens silvery, when they
The fairest face that morn e'er look'd upon
Craigdarroch began, with a tongue smooth as oil,
Nor to the beggar's language could I frame my tongue.
He'll gie me guid hunder marks ten:
From hence, if he delight kind Nature's sheen to see.
"Alas! I should have had him still,
Full of this whim was thoughtful Madeline:
And screaming round the passer bye,
Or running oer the herbage brown
And the thyme it is wither'd, and rue is in prime.
That never tongue, although it overteem
Forms might be worshipp'd on the bended knee,
And sought a refuge from their hopes decayed
There can be no farewell to scene like thine;
Whate'er she gat hands on cam near her nae mair;
And coats enough to smother nine.
Under her favourite bower's quiet shade,
No, no, the bees' humming round the gay roses,
Away they follow with a scream and laugh,
And bear the scorn that's in her e'e?
And tell thee that my prayer is very meek;
From thy Sire's to his humblest subject's breast
No more than winds and tides can I avail:--
So far her voice flow'd on, like timorous brook
Far in their shade my Peggy's charms
Thou hast given a peerless toast.
The only sad one; for thou didst not hear
Where we, when children, "hurly-burlied" round,
Or hand of hymning angel, when 'tis seen
O Echo, Echo, on some other day,
To comfort poor old Susan Gale.
Like Hope upon a death-bed, and, unworn
Their children's lips shall echo them, and say--
To sleep inglorious there mid tangled woods,
In such like extremes, why, extremes will come pat;
And horse and servants waiting ready,
An' stain them wi' the saut, saut tear;
He'd look into thy bonnie face,
Ne dim ne red, like God's own head,
And put her lean hands to the horrid thing:
To hold thee lightly on a gentle knee,
Spaces of fire, and all the yawn of hell.--
He drank his poor godship as deep as the sea,
Faith, you and A----s were right
And wander up and down at liberty.
Let the mad poets say whate'er they please
And by thy een, sae bonnie blue,
Pass we the joys and sorrows sailors find,
My horny fist assume the plough again;
Would a' the land do this, then I'll be caution
A peasant's plaint prolongs his dubious date.
In like proportion, less will hurt them.
Let them in Drury-lane be lesson'd!
Upon the honey'd middle of the night,
My sayings will the less obscured seem,
The muse, nae Poet ever fand her,
Reflect athwart the stream their yellow lustres,
Scots, wham Bruce has aften led;
Poor nymph,--poor Pan,--how he did weep to find,
An Empire thou couldst crush, command, rebuild,
Nor do we merely feel these essences
How foolish, or worse, till our summit is gain'd!
Before the daisies, vermeil rimm'd and white,
The eyes, which o'er them shed tears feelingly and fast.
Stood serene Cupids watching silently.
And Isabella's was a great distress,
Whose noises do my spirits soothe
Nought more untranquil than the grassy slopes
Of new-born woe it feels more inly smart:
Before ye gie poor frailty names,
Of youth, and destine thee towards a tomb.
A tide of suffering, rather than forego
Have hung upon the beatings of my heart,
There's some that are dowie, I trow would be fain
What misery most drowningly doth sing
But twa-three winters will inform ye better.
So may they, like their great forbears,
When by the gun she tumbles o'er,
And the moon shines bright, when I rove at night
Even in thy desert, what is like to thee?
Of which, no mortal eye can reach the flowers;
Holy the air, the water, and the fire;
A constellation of a sweeter ray,
Which een my breath can break in twain;
Leading the way, young damsels danced along,
He passeth by; and his weak spirit fails
Yet mutter'd wildly. I could hear he lov'd
And to her pipe was singing, O;
Reposes gladly on as smooth a vale
And eager scrambled the dog-rose to get,
"This river does not see the naked sky,
--I've heard of hearts unkind, kind deeds
But the present hour, was in my pow'r
And when Rome falls--the World." From our own land
For books they follow fashions new
As from the stroke of the Enchanter's wand:
All choose, as various they're inclin'd
On moonlight seas soft gleams the sky
Snatching out hasty mouthfuls from the stack.
Nor even Apollo when he sang alone,
And, when all were clear vanish'd, still he caught
Yon sang,  ye'll sen't wi cannie care,
And all that winter, when at night
Where I may find the agonies, the strife
Of the coy nightingale was yearly found,
So felt he, who first told, how Psyche went
Where is the laird or belted knight
For life and spunk like ither Christians,
Then Goody, who had nothing said,
And not less anxious, sure, this night than ever,
Nae cotillion brent new frae France,
And Knowledge spreads them on her ample lap;
I would not be a flower to stand
The hermit bees find them but once and away.
Yet it was but a dream: yet such a dream
Is said so earnest none can think it long.
But who can with fate and quart-bumpers contend?
'Mid tumult and uproar this man must repose;
She took her mither's Holland sheets,
And in paste gems and frippery deck her;
I love to see the old heath's withered brake
To those who strove with the bright golden wing
Were dead and gone, and her caressing tongue
Where things that own not Man's dominion dwell,
Where little summer flowers with seasons blow
Nor would I turn its sweets to gall
Rotting from sire to son, and age to age,
And feel thro' every vein Love's raptures roll.
"Now let me pass a cruel, cruel space,
Sure my kind saint took pity on me,
To steal a blink, by a' unseen;
Next up rose our bard, like a prophet in drink;--
That I may speak my grief into thine ear;
My sheep upon the mountain fed,
How could you let me sleep so sound
Should give me life, his childhood shall grow up
His spirit to the sorrow of the time;
That, live as long as live he may,
Where life will fade like visioned dreams
Canst thou leave me thus, my Katy?
Hear'st thou the groans that rend his breast?
But ay the tear comes in my e'e,
Our life is a false nature--'tis not in
Where Bruce  ance rul'd the martial ranks,
Here's to thee, my hero, my sodger laddie.
Ere evening to be trodden like the grass
Tore down those remnants with a Harpy's hand,
When doubts might rise to give just cause to weep,
Who say to us in slander's breath
She watches till he's out of sight,
The teeth o' time may gnaw Tantallan,
Had ne'er a lighter heart than she.
Of his white palace in wild forest nook,
The owls have hooted all night long,
And mantle laced with gems of garish light,
My thoughts on former pleasures ran;
That fate may in her fairest page,
Fled is that music:--Do I wake or sleep?
To beckon up the sun, I seek with thee
We're a' noddin, at our house at hame.
Impossible--how dearly they embrace!
Beheld her smile in Danger's Gorgon face,
O May, thy morn was ne'er sae sweet
The old dog lay and licked the wounds that bled,
Sir, in that circle you are fam'd;
Tombed in a palace? Was she chaste and fair?
They dipp'd their swords in the water, and did tease
What wad you wish for mair, man?
When summer from the meadow carts the hay
A song--a mighty difference in his way.
But the God fostering her chilled hand,
"And tell me, had you rather be,"
He hums and he hankers, he frets and he cankers,
That's blinkin in the lift sae hie;
To laws a lawless power hath passed;
All now is stript to the cold wintry air.
This chap will dearly like our kin',
High in the midst, in honour of the bride:
For I maun crush amang the stoure
Where blackbirds join the shepherd's lays
An honest man may like a glass,
Recording Freedom's smile and Asia's tear?
The Roman saw these tombs in his own age,
My fever'd parchings up, my scathing dread
An' Reid, to common sense appealing.
But, thanks to Heav'n, that's no the gate
Perhaps upon his mould'ring breast
But thou, of temples old, or altars new,
Dusky and huge, enlarging on the sight,
O'er which bend four milky plumes
(Hey, and the rue grows bonnie wi' thyme),
With me he never would have stay'd:
The feast was done, the red wine circling fast,
Morat! the proud, the patriot field! where man
Nor turned she round, as was her former way,
Which gilds it with revivifying ray;
And watched him take her milkpail oer a stile;
And in a quiet home once more my father slept.
On thee, thou rugged Nurse of savage men!
To see each melancholy alteration;
Beseeching him, the while his hand she wrung,
And hoists his handkerchief for sail
Are fluttering round the room like doves in pairs;
But when he saw the dog and heard the cry
But checked by every tie, I may not dare
'Gainst the smooth surface, and to mark anon,
His life was one long war with self-sought foes,
Wandering in vain about bewildered shores.
And leaves his hold and cackles, groans, and dies.
And far be thou distant, thou reptile that seizes
If ought of thee, or of thy mammy,
Wae worth thy power, thou cursed leaf,
Muse of my native land, am I inspir'd?
Each by a sacred tripod held aloft,
People this lonely tower, this tenement refit?
It hath no flatterers--Vanity can give
Now I behold in you fear, hope, and wrath;
That when in power would never shelter thee.
And all the headlong torrents far and near,
--"Shame on me, Sir! this lusty lamb,
And nipt his nose closer and twirled his stick round
This hallowed, too, the memorable kiss
Nae mair then, we'll care then,
She goes, but not to realms of everlasting rest!
Alas! when mingling souls forget to blend,
Enforces pang on pang, and stifles gasp on gasp.
These dreary caverns for the open sky.
She ask'd her brothers, with an eye all pale,
What maid retrieve when man's flushed hope is lost?
Imagination's struggles, far and nigh,
Scowl on, ye fates! until the firmament
If, kindly cruel, early Hope is crost,
And ready still past kisses to outnumber
He met wi' the devil; says, "How do yow fen?"
And many a jealous conference had they,
Damp awe assail'd me; for there 'gan to boom
And mould to every taste thy dear delusive shape.
Deep in heart-wrung tears I'll pledge thee,
Dearer than self, possesses or possessed
Sir Wisdom's a fool when he's fou,
Good-bye to all but love! Then doth he spring
Thought marks without hoar shadows of sublime,
Nae kind of license out I'm takin';
Of flowers budded newly; and the dew
I sigh'd, and said amang them a',
The hapless poet flounders on through life;
Ye winged hours that o'er us past,
All death-shadows, and glooms that overcast
And his white hair was awful, and a mat
Truth breathed by chearfulness.
Enjoying large each spring and well,
Lifts its sweet head into the air, and feeds
Its rocky marge, and balances once more
I call no goddess to inspire my strains,
Poor is all that princely pride.
Nor felt, nor feigned at least, the oft-told flames,
My love is still for thee. The hour may come
But what is the north and its Highlands to me?
Float in voluptuous fleeces o'er the hills;
Saturn, sleep on:--O thoughtless, why did I
Or like the rainbow's lovely form
While deil a hair yoursel' ye're better,
Close to her ear touching the melody;--
And it was in the English tongue.
When at my feet emerg'd an old man's hand,
There some grave Moslem to devotion stoops,
And the loud glabber round the flaze soon stops
Was modelled in a less terrestrial mould,
The great Argyll led on his files,
That nestled in his arms. A dimpled hand,
There's nane ever fear'd that the truth should be heard,
Oft signal-calls of danger chittering high
And ay the saut tear blin's her e'e:
And I shall spurn as vilest dust
Dance, and Provençal song, and sunburnt mirth!
And ay the stound, the deadly wound,
The day it is short, and the night it is lang,
Perchance my heart and harp have lost a string--
With joy, with rapture, I would toil;
And as, in sparkling majesty, a star
See, in another picture, nymphs are wiping
For every weed and every thing,
And I will luve thee still, my dear,
Where she cropt some sprigs of thyme
Shunning soft pity's rising sway,
My love and native land farewell,
What themselves think of it; from forth his eyes
Thy tree hath lost its blossoms, and the rind,
Of April meadows? Here her altar shone,
Calling out like a press after thieves.
He multiplied himself among mankind,
Lorenzo, and we are most loth to invade
Then owre again, the jovial thrang,
Robed half in mist, bedewed with snowy rills,
As cauld a minister's e'er spak,
For what has made the sage or poet write
Here's a bottle and an honest friend!
So dear a picture of his sovereign power,
The sea-gulls not more constant; for I had
Thus I remember all the pleasant flow
His garters knit below his knee,
From majesty: but in clear truth the themes
For surely that would touch her heart,
Nae godly symptom ye can ca' that;
But this was firm, and from a foreign shore
When fields and meadows glow with green;
And make a pale light in your cypress glooms,
I sue not for my ruddy drops of life,
And, ever after, through those regions be
Yet felt some portion of their Mother's pains,
I bear, corroding Joy and Youth?
Of rock-built cities, bidding nations quake,
I heard from morn to morn a merry thrush
Thus it blooms on till night is bye
The bonnie lass of Ballochmyle.
Within this dear mansion, may wayward contention
And this is much--and all--which will not pass away.
If thou art staunch without a stain,
Escap'd from dull mortality's harsh net?
Taste their pure fountains. First the realm I'll pass
And oft from his warm fire he'd go,
This piteous news so much it shock'd her,
Yet even in these days so far retir'd
Yet so they did--and every dealer fair
*       *       *       *       *
Teugh Johnnie, staunch Geordie, an' Walie,
How sweet the soothing calm that smoothly stills
Green be your woods, and fair your flowers,
"The sun that overhangs yon moors,
It deepens still, the work is scarce begun,
They sip the scandal potion pretty;
Now waving grain, wide o'er the plain,
The fascination of thy magic gaze?
"Though in virtue's proud mouth thy report be a stain,
But now she's got an unco ripple;
And in her wide imagination stood
The sound so mimics fast-approaching showers,
Or if I blush when thou shalt ca' me
Sweet the lark's wild-warbled lay,
Without an Ark for wretched Man's abode,
A wooded cleft, and, far away, the blue
To musty laws lined out with wretched rule
A scene of peace, though soothing to his soul:
Nor mortal eye the distant end foresees.
What love Lorenzo for their sister had,
The southern Scott, the minstrel who called forth
My years already doubly number thine;
And haud their noses to the grunstane,
The stubborn Tories dare to die;
Amaz'd and full of fear; like anxious men
"Beneath the church-yard tree."
When snouted wild-boars routing tender corn
Doth vault the waters, so the waters drew
Wi' sauce, ragouts, and sic like trashtrie,
Wad trust his Grace wi' a', Jamie,
Would, in the way His wisdom sees the best,
And winds are rude in Biscay's sleepless bay.
Thy dawn of little joys,--to sit and see
How can your flinty hearts enjoy
When done the journey of her nightly race,
The neist time ye gang o'er the moor,
'Tis all thine own! and if its hue
And changed to harmonies, for ever stealing
The light--the dusk--the dark--till break of day!"
Leaving, in naked comeliness, unshaded,
All but neglect: and so, his spirit damped
Sweet too the converse of these happy mortals,
Where is that standard  which Pelagio bore,
Not twenty paces from the door,
Three carts, an' twa are feckly new;
With sober selfish ease they sip it up;
That the still murmur of the honey bee
The silence when some rhymes are coming out;
The God on half-shut feathers sank serene,
Of the lone woodcutter; and listening still,
Or to the over-foolish, Giant-Gods?
In desolate places, where dank moisture breeds
Had wrought upon ye; and how I might best
In silent joy to think at last I look on Thee!
Ye who of him may further seek to know,
The patient weeds; that now unshent by foam
Now haply down yon gay green shaw,
For all this came a ruin: side by side
For these I know thou canst not feel a drouth,
And shadows forth its glory. There is given
All foreign things where eer I go,
My best leg foremost, I'll set up my brow,
Each several one against the other three,
The maid who wanders by my side--
And yet they knew it was Lorenzo's face:
At which we start and fret; till in the end,
But this will not endure, nor be endured!
Be thy sad weapon of defence--and so,
Where dwelt of yore the Lusians' luckless queen;
Into a labyrinth now my soul would fly,
As by one drunken fellow his comrades you'll find.
Gain mars the landscape every day--
And from the blessed power that rolls
Love turned een water into wine.
Oh for one hour of blind old Dandolo!
There was wide wand'ring for the greediest eye,
A hizzie's the half o' my craft,
Or when his spirit, with more calm intent,
That in their holes abed at close of day
Crumbles into itself. By the cloud girth
The sun had clos'd the winter day,
Or on a half-reap'd furrow sound asleep,
To keep it unaffronted, unassail'd
There was a lass, and she was fair,
That a big-bellied bottle's a cure for all care.
While round-topt bush, or briar-entangled hedge,
Apollo is once more the golden theme!
For 'tis the nicest touch of human honour,
"Ye scattered birds that faintly sing,
And mouldering now in silent dust,
Had fix'd his eye, without a twinkle or stir
He gobbles loud and drives the boys from play;
It puts but little in your pat;
At kith or kin I need na spier,
The tears trickled down like the hail and the rain:
Not oat-sheaves drooping in the western sun;
Or, by the reaper's nightly beam,
By foes in fight o'erthrown, yet victors here,
Lake Leman woos me with its crystal face,
A speck, a mist, a shape, I wist!
Its wretched essence; and to dream of fame,
For still they soared unutterably high:
Is there a bard of rustic song,
With nostrums vain of boasted powers,
All Heaven and Earth are still: From the high host
To see no other verdure than its own;
When wastes the soul with anguish?
I'll kilt my coats aboon my knee,
Will drop their scarlet berry cups of dew?
And mingle sighs with mine, love.
Oh joy for her! when e'er in winter
The ricket reeling of a crooked swagger,
"The doctor he has made him wait,
Envied, yet how unenviable! what stings
Than let them ance out owre the water;
For which full many a daring crime
And with stedfast dejection his eyes are intent
I see them, on the mortal world beneath,
When all his wintry billows pour
We'll o'er the water to Charlie;
Even by the sufferer--and, in each event,
Nor sigh for Jenny of the Vale,
Ribb'd and inlaid with coral, pebble, and pearl.
Shall stand before him; whom he shall direct
For drink I would venture my neck,
Why is this mortal here? Dost thou not know
A well-known voice sigh'd, "Sweetest, here am I!"
If merited, the penalty is paid;
The space, the splendour of the draperies,
Had buried long his hopes, no more to rise:
"They'll both be here, 'tis almost ten,
But at New York, wi' knife an' fork,
It wad frae monie a blunder free us
Quoth Porphyro: "O may I ne'er find grace
Within the breast o' bonnie Jean.
Then hangs a dust spot in the sunny skies,
And when wit and refinement hae polish'd her darts,
Has wept for thee, calling to Jove aloud.
Some say, if to the pond you go,
In fragments--choked up vaults, and frescos steeped
Were a' the charms his lordship lo'ed.
Smoothing the velvet of the pale hedge-rose;
How he would place his hand beside his ear,
And execrates man's savage, ruthless deeds!)
But Yarrow braes nor Ettrick shaws
Is coming fresh upon me: O be kind,
Green, sunny green they shine, but still
I know thou doom'st me to despair,
A little book,--and then a joy awakes
Fallen in jealous curls about his shoulders bare.
Gude grant that thou may ay inherit
Rest, ye wild storms, in the cave of your slumbers,
She goes from house to house the village oer,
So rainbow-sided, touch'd with miseries,
Some native blood was seen thy streets to dye,
Sometimes all little birds that are
She snatch'd the candle in her hand,
The Laird was a widdiefu', bleerit knurl;
Why should I strive to show what from thy lips
But when, alas! he multiplies himself,
Nameless, yet thus omnipotent, which here
So, purposing each moment to retire,
The periwinkle trail'd its wreathes;
To light-hung leaves, in smoothest echoes breaking
Forgetful utterly of self-intent;
That day I was my Willie's bride!
Compar'd with this, how poor Religion's pride,
A softer feeling for her fairy halls:
"When I awoke, 'twas in a twilight bower;
To hover on the verge of darkness--rays
Through sunny meadows, that outskirt the side
And thirst of gold might tempt the deep
I seek nae mair o' Heaven to share
And brotherly love be the centre.
Thy own reproach alone dost fear,
O thoughtless lassie, life's a faught;
To show me visions of most gorgeous dyes,
In leaden hues of desolation fade away.
That men of health were of unusual cheer;
Golden his hair of short Numidian curl,
But when a day or two confirms her stay
Who call'd on Fame, low standing by,
An' stable-meals at fairs were dreigh,
There ran a stream of lamps straight on from wall to wall.
With joy; and, often an intruding guest,
That feels relief by bidding sorrow flow,
Our whipper-in, wee, blastit wonner,
Comes hame, perhaps to shew a braw new gown,
Hails it with tears, her stout defender sent:
O dullness! portion of the truly blest!
Haud up thy han', Deil! ance, twice, thrice!
Groan'd for the old allegiance once more,
Ye maggots, make your windings;
Is Autumn, in her weeds o' yellow!
Near the brown mole on her neck that to me a diamond shone
The best on a' the shore o' Bucky.
And yet the landscape wears a pleasing hue.
Beam'd upward from the vallies of the east:
The Indus with his Macedonian numbers?
When out the hellish legion sallied.
To trace its sedgy banks, from trouble free:
To crush the villain in the dust.
Like wind-driv'n hail it did assail,
The scenes our earliest dreams have dwelt upon;
As great and gracious a' as sisters;
And earnestly said: "Brother, 'tis vain to hide
So up rose bright Phoebus--and down fell the knight.
Came vex'd and pettish through her nostrils small.
Her from her own fair youth, and pleasures gay,
While corn grows green in simmer showers,
Where are the muses fled that could produce
Kind Sir, I've read your paper through,
Than join the crushing crowd, doomed to inflict or bear?
Where some, from frequent meddlings of his whip,
Swifter than lightning went these wonders rare;
Clap in his walie nieve a blade,
He blush'd for shame, he quat his name,
To him we turned:--we had no other aid.
Doth care for cleanness of surtout or shirt,
Three joyous good fellows, with hearts clear of flaw;
Dost think, when wealth is won,
Hence Dempster's zeal-inspired tongue;
Vain all th' omnipotence of female charms
The wily Mother sees the conscious flame
In scorn, but by the drinking horse
But these are deeds which should not pass away,
"Perhaps he's climbed into an oak,
I have not ask'd it, ever thinking thee
In other regions, past the scanty bar
Had chidden herald Hesperus away,
Far from the bonnie banks of Ayr.
An' owre she warsl'd in the ditch:
While Glory crowns so many a meaner crest!
And came--and saw--and conquered!  But the man
Still under bleak Misfortune's blasting eye;
While to the rugged north our musing turns
But now wi' sighs and starting tears,
Fareweel to a' our Scottish fame,
And wield the slavish sickle, not the sword:
And thou hast almost suck'd thy fill.
Huge as a planet, and like that roll round,
Say, Lassie, why thy train amang,
Then the smith with his tools in Sir John made a breach,
She clasps a babe, to whom her breast yields no relief.
And, just beyond, on light tiptoe divine,
Ah! what if I should lose thee, when so fain
I have a ditty for my hollow cell."
With little admiring or blaming;
Whare ye may nobly rax your leather,
And Monarchs tremble in their Capitals,
And hang on little twigs and start again.
And float my brittle limbs o'er polar seas?
Far, far from thee, the fate severe
Chatted with thee, and many days exil'd
Young mountaineer! descend where alleys bend
The names of heroes, burst from clouds concealing,
By angry wolf, or pard with prying head,
The Psalmist numbered out the years of man:
That little wren knows well his sheltering bower,
When thus the caird address'd her:
A feeling brought with every Spring.
Yet tho' his caustic wit was biting, rude,
With thistle-beards, and such small locks of wool
But the ae best dance e'er cam to the land
Hail, thairm-inspirin', rattlin' Willie!
The mavis sang and felt himself alone
Ourselves whole summers by a river glade;
And five times did I say to him,
All madly dancing through the pleasant valley,
Cold, alter'd friendship's cruel part,
And now to stalks of tasseled sow-grass cling,
The Latmian persever'd along, and thus
Full of the true, the blushful Hippocrene,
Rheumatics gnaw, or cholic squeezes;
With wrong's illusions when he wanted friends;
Looked to the winged Lion's marble piles,
There's wealth and ease for gentlemen,
In harmless tendril they each other chain'd,
With his depths and his shallows, his good and his evil,
To occupy me wholly, and to fashion
As light as happy dreams they creep,
The man in arms, 'gainst female charms,
And when all's done, be shoved to hell at last!
For a big-bellied bottle's a heav'n of care.
He brags and he blaws o' his siller,
To the high roof, still mimick'd as they rose
"Twelve steps or more from my mother's door,
Thus ere the Christmas goes the spring is met
Thou stalk o' carl-hemp in man!
In Sodom 'twould make him a king;
When steep'd in dew rich to intoxication.
"I fear you're in a dreadful way,
To things ye knew not of,--were closely wed
As though there wa'n't a cowslip peep to spare.
Farewell, farewell! but this I tell
And own his work indeed divine!
With blindness linked, did on my vitals fall;
And in a silent murmuring complains.
But wad hae spent an hour caressin',
The merle, in his noontide bow'r,
Nor knows the quarter it is in.
And there shall be for thee all soft delight
How many a robe sae gaily floats!
Sir Bard will do himself the pleasure
The carved angels, ever eager-eyed,
To slumbery pout; just as the morning south
And every year encreas'd my store.
Your hard heart breaks the vow;
Wee, sleekit, cow'rin', tim'rous beastie,
Their tiptop nothings, their dull skies, their thrones--
And gathering storms around convulse the closing year.
Then turn to hate a world he had almost forgot.
Blush'd a live damask, and swift-lisping said,
Green fields before us and our native shore,
There, him at Agincourt wha shone,
And moss around the stoven spreads, dark green,
But fear the noisome toad and shun the grass;
The sweeping vales, and foaming floods,
And then the Deil he daur na steer ye;
With a still, mysterious stealth:
But the quart was a forfeit; so pay for the next.
Forms which it sighs but to have only dreamed,
To stammer where old Chaucer used to sing.
Abashed at the gaze it cannot shun,
And hung the moles for traitors--though the brook is running still
As busy Trade his labour plies;
And nothing since has floated in the air
Here haply too, at vernal dawn,
And thou mellow mavis that hails the night fa',
Not--thy soft hand, fair sister! let me shun
That watch'd thy early morning.
Better be whelmed beneath the waves, and shun,
By fever, from polluted air incurred,
Conceive in boyhood and pursue as men,
Most fondly lipp'd, and then these accents came:
Made him delay to let their tender feet
And scarce regret the region of his birth,
But for how lang the flie may stang,
And so left Florence in a moment's space,
The youthful blooming Nelly lay,
How lang and dreary is the night,
Bethinking thee, how melancholy loth
Not there, nor in sign, symbol, or portent
That two, or one, are almost what they seem,--
Mellowed and mingling, yet distinctly seen,
Sat silent: for the maid was very loth
Nought guessing, till some sudden turn espies
The bonniest sight that e'er I saw
Plod the last sands of life,--where not a flower appears.
"Thou swan of Ganges, let us no more breathe
That charm that can the strongest quell,
Those wonted smiles, O let me share;
Convulsion to a mouth of many years?
You may perchance behold them on the twigs,
One field, a flock, and what the neighbouring flood
To see the end of all my gains,
And Death the sable smoke where vanishes the flame.
Or to more deeply blest Anchises? or,
That should he lose his eyes and ears,
GOD! was thy globe ordained for such to win and lose?
Semblance, with straw and pauniered ass, they made
His nectar-draughts from folly's flowers,
But every tail thou pay't them hollow,
Wi' your liberty's chain and your wit;
Which all are loth to lose, as well as Jane.
She spies her friends, she shouts a greeting;
I've serv'd my king and country lang--
The frozen God still couchant on the earth,
But with such as he, where'er he be,
Thy trumpet voice, though broken now and dying,
Beneath th' Omniscient Eye above,
One against one, or two, or three, or all
While thou art towering in thy strength of heart,
Thee, gentle lady, did he disenthral:
From those drear solitudes and frowsy cells,
And the motion unsettles a tear;
Unceremonious visit pays and croaks,
Tho' three times doubled fairly,
A thousand images of one that was,
For 'tis his nature to advance or die;
O! soon, to me, may summer suns
Fareweel, fareweel! sweet Ballochmyle!
No more so strange; for merry wine, sweet wine,
On fire by lightning; with ethereal flame
Yet never would he join the lover's whining crew.
There's not a flower that blooms in May
To Hampstead, Brentford, Harrow make repair;
Space region'd with life-air; and barren void;
And when in cellar they regale,
But when the May had turned to haws,
Till I touch the grass beneath;
With its unemptied cloud of gentle rain,
Rich are their scarfs, their chargers featly prance:
Of newest joys upon that alp. Sometimes
Winding through palmy fern, and rushes fenny,
'Till something held within the pat,
But welcome the dream o' sweet slumber,
He shakes the green bough in his hand.
The days of peace and slumberous calm are fled;
And if I'm disposed to be merry,
Are roots for its eternal home.
Or, beneath the sheltering rock,
Above its prostrate brethren of the cave;
One that I foster'd in my youthful years:
Bless him, thou GOD of love and truth,
The grand, the sweet, the terse, the free, the fine;
How they maun thole a factor's snash:
Our little life, nor Bard prescribe his art,
Hereat, with many sobs, her gentle strife
A mirror and a bath for Beauty's youngest daughters!
It stands erect, and like a stone
Deepening to richness from a snowy gleam;
For Moodie speeds the holy door,
O, bid him breed him up wi' care;
Yes, I must pass them for a nobler life,
To thee shall home, or food, or pastime yield.
All its completions--be quickly near,
To milk, caressed them more than eer she'd done;
Thy grassy banks whereon the milk-white steer
O wha came tripping down the street,
Your beauty's a flower, in the morning that blows,
Lies dimpled like thy sen, bonny Mary O!
Nibble the weeds, and take a sup;
And piled the hearth, and wrung their garments damp,
To-day thou wilt not see him, nor to-morrow,
An element filling the space between;
His nervy knees there lay a boar-spear keen.
And swiftly forming in the ranks of war--
In favour wi' some gentle master,
No love but thine my heart shall know.
Ne shapes of men ne beasts we ken--
And when the day had closed his e'e
Time, the prime minister of Death!
Betwixt two marble shafts:--there they reposed,
His tears, who weeps for thee. Where dost thou sigh?
But Nelly's looks are blithe and sweet,
'Twas throwing words away; for still
A king and a father to place on his throne?
Of Wealth and Wantonness, the choice retreat
And careful note each op'ning grace,
From home and friends and all alone.
It is the wish'd, the trysted hour!
And faith I agree with th' old prig to a hair;
A healthy man, a man full grown
There seems a floating whisper on the hill,
For sweet consolation to church I did fly;
From happy pieties, thy lucent fans,
Her Chief is slain--she fills his fatal post;
I was distracted; madly did I kiss
And bid wild war his ravage end,
Then off at once, as in a wanton freak:
As fill'd his after life wi' grief,
The sun een seems to lose its way
Lay full of darts; for them alone did seethe
O sweeter than the Marriage-feast,
For o'er the southern moors I have a home for thee."
And Boileau, whose rash envy could allow
Save concubines and carnal companie,
_Imprimis_, then, for carriage cattle,
Will trespass down those cheeks. Companion fair!
Prone to mischief boys are met,
His magian fish through hated fire and flame?
The lasses staw frae mang them a'
By cruel hands the sapling drops,
Of refuge; this, at least, shall still be mine:
Tho' by the neck she should be strung,
An' fill auld age wi' grips an' granes:
"Dear lady," said Endymion, "'tis past:
Oh, thou! in Hellas deemed of heavenly birth,
From gray but leafy walls, where Ruin greenly dwells.
My name she says, is Mistress Jean,
There Isabella's spotless worth
This while ye hae been mony a gate
And merely given to the cold bleak air.
When day, expiring in the west,
To the coy muse, with me she would not live
Thou too art gone, thou loved and lovely one!
And where I have enshrined piously
I look'd upon the eldritch deck,
O thou wouldst joy to live in such a place;
Rude battered finger post, that stooping shows
They get a forked stick to bear him down
And even remembrance of her love's delay.
Cock'd sprush when first he clasp'd me;
Through clouds of fleecy white, laughs the coerulean sky.
But when he saw the Evening star above
And the souls ye left behind you
She won each gaping burgess' heart,
Which we at hay-time in our pockets took,
The grass, the sky, the winds a-blowing;
These grassy solitudes, and seen the flowers
O Melancholy, linger here awhile!
But may the tapmast grain that wags
An' baith a yellow George to claim,
Know thou, O stranger to the fame
And grounds of oats in rustling green
With wonder's never-ceasing tales;
Where oaks, that erst the Druid knew, are growing,
Or from old Skiddaw's top, when fog conceals
Though ignorance loads it with abuse,
The manly tar, my mason Billie,
True passion, that so burns to plead,
Made Ariadne's cheek look blushingly.
Remember the moment when Previsa fell,
Auld Brig appear'd of ancient Pictish race,
Now more than ever seems it rich to die,
But you, like the star that athwart gilds the sky,
Is grass the green that clothes the ground?
Speak not of grief, young stranger, or cold snails
That from the bottom look at me
So lonely 'twas, that God himself
To one, who keeps within his stedfast aim
The Warrior's weapon and the Sophist's stole
At length I reach'd the bonny glen,
Or chirps the grasshopper one good-night carol more.
To faint once more by looking on my bliss--
And murmurs musical and swift jug jug
I'm sure sma' pleasure it can gie,
And straught to Stirling winged their flight;
With all her reckless birds upon the wing,
I careless quit aught else below,
Tho' fortune use you hard an' sharp;
Wi' linked hands, we took the sands
Whether to faint Elysium, or where
And all the fields with music rung.
Peggy was missed without a cause,
The peer I don't envy, I give him his bow;
That man to man, the warld o'er,
And thank'd her for her courtesie;
With power to dream deliciously; so wound
Think ye, that sic as you and I,
Into forgetfulness; and, for the sage,
Is there no daring bard will rise, and tell
And "pink" the chaffinch cries its well-known strain,
My essence? What serener palaces,
And all night kept awake, for sinners' sake to grieve.
Rise like the rocks that part Hispania's land from Gaul:
Wife and children all are there,
Their pounces were murder, and terror their cry,
Upon its strength it broke in two.
But yet reject them not as such;
_Now_ is past, is changed agen,
That being, thou would'st be again, and go,
Vistas of solemn beauty, where I'd wander
Nor coined my cheek to smiles,--nor cried aloud
From hurry to and fro. Soon, up aloft,
There's braw, braw lads on Yarrow braes,
Let us away, my love, with happy speed;
Seest thou whose step, unwilling hither bends?
And that fair kneeling Goddess; and then spake,
I on this spot will offer: Pan will bid
And they have gripet Hughie Graham,
Out-rivall'd by the radiant eyes
And ill could I the thought of such sad parting brook.
As Burnet, lovely from her native skies;
The wilder'd stranger--seeming not to see,
We hear around when Hesperus is coming.
A brother to relieve, how exquisite the bliss!"
The disappointment, the anxiety,
'Till his brain turned--and ere his twentieth year,
While, facing thus the crimson west,
Three gaudy standards flout the pale blue skies;
Like plunging monsters rising underneath,
As from the Pythian's mystic cave of yore,
What pity, in rearing so beauteous a system,
The soul and source of Music, which makes known
'Till curst with age, obscure an' starvin',
Nae mair the flow'r in field or meadow springs;
That feeling to express, or to improve--
I too have my blisses, which richly abound
Than ever paced the slab which paves the princely head.
It is not ours to judge,--far less condemn;
Actium--Lepanto--fatal Trafalgar;
The plain is far beneath--oh! let him seize
Here sat and mused half some long summer day
Whom death had all untimely ta'en.
Ah! could I tell the wonders of an isle
She took to bed and looked up no more,
I sud be laith to think ye hinted
And I'll cleed thee in the tartan sae fine,
Where there was never sound of mortal men,
"With thee, my bark, I'll swiftly go
Thou's broken the heart o' thy ain Jock Rab.
Come weal, come woe, we'll gather and go,
When nature all is sad like me!
Were seen about the markets: none knew where
They fled like frighted doos, man.
A power overshadows thee! Oh, brave!
What way poor bodies liv'd ava.
Then up came the blacksmith: Sir Barley, said he,
And reap from Earth--Sea--joy almost as dear
Experience taught, and deem it wise
Circled the wide-extending court below;
He hacks to teach, they mangle to expose.
The place where they fell and the scenes where they lie,
To that trusty auld worthy Clackleith.
Sleep gins close the labourer's eye:
Or when serenely wand'ring in a trance
Nested and quiet in a valley mild,
But aiblins honest Master Heron,
In many places;--some has been upstirr'd
From such fine pictures, heavens! I cannot dare
Had kirk and state been in the gate,
While some are cozie i' the neuk,
And a million million slimy things
On the fetters that link him to death.
With throat unslack'd, with black lips bak'd
And gin she take the thing amiss,
I will wash my ploughman's hose,
That strict restraint, which broken, ever balks
My skiff along green shelving coasts, to hear
or fairies, and seem pleased or dull as the weather permits. In many
Attach'd him to the generous truly great,
Though the grave closed between us,--'twere the same,
Down the deep Alps; nor would the hostile horde
Not thirty tyrants now enforce the chain,
Or the old eyes dissolving at his woe,
The Spirit, in whose honour shrines are weak
Resuming quickly thus; while ocean's tide
The silent sea. From the sweet thoughts of home,
That Misery's another word for Grief;
Of son against his sire. I saw him fall,
O' stature short, but genius bright,
A brighter glance her form reflected gave,
And sawning boy by tanning corn espy,
If the ass were the king o' the brutes.
But never, never can come near the heart.
Now, well-bred men--and you are all well-bred--
Or smaller kinds, as if beglossed with dew
And blew on his whistle his requiem shrill.
So perish monuments of mortal birth,
Through unknown things; till exhaled asphodel,
How was it nurtur'd to such bursting forth,
Another was on Thursday brought,
And had such manly ardour in his eye,
And spinning's my father's desire,
Her feeble pulse gies strong presumption
For Jane in flowers delighted from a child--
Is known; as grateful nations oft have found
Honour to Marceau! o'er whose early tomb
Skulks to his cavern, 'mid the gruff complaint
When roving through the gather'd hay,
The honest man, though e'er sae poor,
Gae seek for pleasure where ye will,
If ye'll but stand to what ye've said,
Up the hill-side; and now 'tis buried deep
The recollections of one's younger years.
Ay, a sweet kiss--you see your mighty woes.
He bolder shuffles the huge hills of snow,
In him this glowed when all beside had ceased to glow.
In right thereof; for 'tis the eternal law
They had to do with Martha Ray.
And spunkie ance to make us mellow,
O'erhung with wild woods, thick'ning green;
When awful Beauty joins with all her charms,
When one finds losses out to stifle smiles
The daisies were quaking about in their white
An urn of tears, as though thou wert cold dead;
In amorous rillets down her shrinking form!
About to beg a pass for leave to beg:
Like a loose casement in the wind.
Kate soon will be a woefu' woman!
In vain to me the cowslips blaw,
"For ev'n his failings lean'd to virtue's side."
Him thou wilt hear; so I will rest in hope
Smile on--nor venture to unmask
Then hey for a lass wi' a tocher,
And flowering laurels spring from diamond vases;
Preys upon high adventure, nor can tire
Now wad ye sing this double fight,
Lure him to thrum thy empty lays,
"Whatever star is in the skies,
And so he'll gallop on for aye,
(What warm, poetic heart, but inly bleeds,
My hand-waled curse keep hard in chase
But tell him he was learned and clark,
And, after lifting up his aged hands,
The Father mixes a' wi' admonition due.
What says she, my dearie, my Eppie M'Nab?
And laid him with the Earth's preceding clay.
Snares for the failing; I would also deem
Will mingle kindly with the meadow air,
In aught that tries the heart, how few withstand the proof!
They say their master is a knave--
Life is the rose's hope while yet unblown;
And viewless Echo's ear, astonish'd, rends.
Who, all-forgetting, all forgot,
Observ'd us, fondly-wand'ring, stray!
Here's Chieftain M'Leod, a chieftain worth gowd,
We sought a home where we uninjured might abide.
Yet with smooth smile his Tyrant can accost,
Thro' bloody flood or field to dash,
Let me entwine thee surer, surer--now
While oer the pleachy lands of mellow brown,
For wine we follow Bacchus through the earth;
We'll hide the cooper behind the door,
Bloom'd, and gave up her honey to the lees.
As e'er in tug or tow was drawn:
Ah! may'st thou ever be what now thou art,
One trifling particular, truth, should have miss'd him;
My fine existence in a golden clime.
ALI reclined, a man of war and woes:
Even to Madeline's chamber, and there hide
Apollo's garland:--yet didst thou divine
Puts Dob's best swiftness in his heavy heels,
The placid features of a human face:
How she would start, and blush, thus to be caught
Founders of sects and systems, to whom add
He reel'd his wonted bottle swagger,
That one who through this middle earth should pass
And there oft scares the cooing amorous dove
And yellow Autumn presses near,
"A little idle sauntering thing!"
With other ministrations thou, O nature!
They steek their een, an' graip an' wale,
Annihilated senates;--Roman, too,
For her bosom burns with honour's glow,
And there began a lang digression
But now a rumour's like to rise,
But when my eyes with thine thereon could dance:
Tis three years and a quarter since I left my own fireside
And fancy's straining eye can go,
Flows from the eternal source of Rome's imperial hill.
The wakeful bloodhound rose, and shook his hide,
Stay! though the greenest woods be thy domain,
Towards common thoughts and things for very fear;
Oh Peggy was a young thing, her face was common sense,
But, a fly for your load, you'll break down on the road
Anon they wander'd, by divine converse,
Who boldly daur thy cause maintain
At his right hand stood winged Love, and on
Gurgling in beds of coral: for anon,
On the far depth where sheeted lightning plays;
He had begun a plaining of his woe.
Syne rhyme till't we'll time till't,
That is the Grasshopper's--he takes the lead
Long mark the battle-field with hideous awe:
Dear is the dewdrop to the flower,
Thou'lt leave my hand with eager speed
Or tell what new taxation's comin',
Was to be glorious; 'twas a foolish quest,
A most strange something did I see;
Till he did greet white Achelous' tide,
If wiser too--he hinted some suggestion,
He looks and laughs at a' that.
A pile before-hand, wood or stick,
Disconsolate will wander up and down,
Be lull'd with songs of mine. Fair world, adieu!
Strange ministrant of undescribed sounds,
But whilst with both hands I can hold the glass steady,
Auld Wodrow lang has hatch'd mischief,
A stratagem, that makes the beldame start:
Julia--the daughter--the devoted--gave
And down by Simpson's  wheel'd the left about:
There was a listening fear in her regard,
"Poor naked wretches, wheresoe'er you are
But your curst wit, when it comes near it,
One almost fancies that such happy things,
Tho' I maun say't, I wad be silly,
How life and love are all a dream.
And at his elbow, Souter Johnny,
Beneath an ivied tree, his sheltering seat,
If through the air a Zephyr more serene
That Johnny may perhaps be drown'd,
Have seen a new tinge in the western skies:
Is like a floating spirit's. But there are
To the axe of the spoiler and self-interest fell a prey,
Babbling so wildly of its lovely daughters
Alone o'er steeps and foaming falls to lean;
They roar an' cry a' throu'ther;
Of sadness. O that she would take my vows,
Which saves a sick man from the feather'd pall
Thou pourest on him thy soft influences,
Then will I mourn what now I brave,
And ducks and geese that clamorous joys repeat
Whence gush the streams of song: in happy hour
But what is this to love? O I could fly
In darkness, and amid the many shapes
The path, small hillocks burning lie
An' he swoor by his conscience,
But I shall scribble down some blether
A whirling gulf of phantasy and flame:
Who did for me what none beside have done,
Straying about, yet, coop'd up in the den
Betray sweet Jenny's unsuspecting youth?
Now's the day, and now's the hour;
Such as once heard, in gentle heart, destroys
And put a sack within the hole, and lie
Which is itself, no changes bring surprise;
Ev'n I who sing in rustic lore,
Men, three parts made by tailors and by barbers,
So may he make each curst oppressor bleed--
Ilk care and fear, when thou art near,
And shudder'd; for the overwhelming voice
The Saxon lads, wi' loud placads,
I mov'd and could not feel my limbs,
In backward yawns. But all were soon alive:
And in those meads where sometime she might haunt,
And do not dread the waves below,
Glimmer'd our dear-loved home, alas! no longer ours!
Into the green-recessed woods they flew;
But till my last moments my words are the same--
To gather what we shall be when the frame
This long-explored but still exhaustless mine
An' monie lads' an' lasses' fates
But the rapturous charm o' the bonnie green knowes,
And ne'er again the Boy his bosom sought:
Or dark as misery's woeful night.--
Said the good man to Calidore alert;
Nature's clear beauty, could pass lightly by
I strive to search wherefore I am so sad,
I could not draw my een from theirs
That gives them back their fathers' heritage:
In Provence call'd, "La belle dame sans mercy:"
Ply ev'ry art o' legal thieving;
Where was he, when the Giant of the Sun
That e'er ga'e gospel horn a blast,
His milking maid the ploughman sung
But hark! the tent has chang'd its voice:
Though the devil p--s in the fire.--
And though more cautious with a living name,
But even now most miserable old,
Th' octogenarian chief, Byzantium's conquering foe.
From these devoted eyes their silver store,
Mine's no joke-matter, let me tell you that;
But hear me, sir, deil as ye are,
Yet look as ye were na lookin' at me.
There came enchantment with the shifting wind,
Forlorn! the very word is like a bell
Ance to the Indies I were wonted,
Where danger seldom cares to come.
And they with looking wants begin;
And once again thy hapless bosom gored,
When, down the steep banks winding warily,
Rank at the core, though tempting to the eyes
Thy love of Tasso, should have cut the knot
At barn or byre thou shalt na drudge,
A pint an' gill I'd gie them baith
Her playmates, with their needle broidery,
From Langley Bush, and so I seem
So if ye will wed, wed for love,
Speeding away swift as the eagle bird?
Along whose track the prince quick footsteps told,
Apollo shriek'd;--and lo! from all his limbs
Of ither vile, wanrestfu' pets!
I oft have dried my tears when thou hast smil'd.
Give me my woman's form, and place me where he is.
His hair, his size, his mouth, his lugs,
For that she was a woman, and without
And make "a sun-shine in a shady place:"
And wow! Tam saw an unco sight!
Oft seen at night, by strangers passing late,
Pale wox I, and in vapours hid my face.
'We follow Bacchus! Bacchus on the wing,
Not like the formal crest of latter days:
Thy walls defaced, thy mouldering shrines removed
Nay, even thus invade a lady's quiet.
The sabbath bells, and their delightful chime;
Or on the rainbow of the salt sand-wave,
Say, was thy little mate unkind,
That on his head an hour has been;
As lang's he has a breath to draw.
"You have deserted me;--where am I now?
O, Henderson! the man--the brother!
Through his whole body something ran,
Not without cause; and should I leave behind
For many moments, ere their ears were sated
So all have set my heavier grief above
Existence by enjoyment, and count o'er
And, may be, that which grows beneath mine eye:
With an Immortal's vengeance--in his eye
Proud as a warhorse wears its haughty plume,
They lay calm-breathing on the bedded grass;
But, if the lover's raptur'd hour
And had a master wild as wild can be,
Now blooms the lily by the bank,
Or gazing o'er the plains where Greek and Persian died.
Come down, we pray thee, ere the hot sun count
But long ere I come back again,
Thy tuneful flame still careful fan;
He is a simple-worded plain old man
The earth to her embrace compels the powers of air.
Have more of substance when they're here
And fragrant oils with ceremony meet
For thou shalt hear this secret all display'd,
From his north cavern. So sweet Isabel
The forest's growth, and Gothic walls between,--
Trig as new pins, and tight's the day was long;
Wink hard, and say the folks hae done their best!
Witness that filial circle round,
(Beauty, where faultless symmetry and grace,
In this braw age o' wit and lear,
I wad been o'er the lugs in love,
Her breath is the breath o' the woodbine,
Where frugal monks their little relics show,
And silence to the evening hour,
A truth, which through our being then doth melt,
And last, my Prologue-business slyly hinted!
As though in pain; for still upon the flint
Now half extinct your powers of song,
'Tis Friendship's pledge, my young, fair friend,
Setting my staff with a' my skill,
Might seem unholy, be of happy cheer!
Whether through poz'd conviction, or disdain,
Ye little know the ills ye court,
Thinking on rugged hours and fruitless toil,
So fare ye well! and hold your tongues,
O whistle, and I'll come to you, my lad:
And the sun smiled to show their end was well.
Is it not better thus our lives to wear,
She who her lovely offspring eyes
How, from a flower, into a fish of gold
And calm as cherished hate, its surface wears
One who, 'twas said, still sighed to all he saw,
The jetty snail creep from the mossy thorn,
Such is the fate of simple bard,
Then neist outspak a raucle carlin,
Mourn, empress of the silent night!
Is sick, and makes a piteous moan,
In murmurs, which his first-endeavouring tongue
Too long, alas, hast thou starv'd on the ruth,
Nestle and turn uneasily about.
Fear not, fear not, thou wedding guest!
The smith and thee gat roaring fou on;
How glorious this affection for the cause
Some other rarer sorts are wanted yet,
Easily rolling so as scarce to mar
Black gowns of each denomination,
Resolve to drink, nay, half to whore, no more;
That lay a stone's throw from us on the moor:
The simple pleasures of the lowly train;
To mark the time as they grow broad, and shorter;
Till every lawless soldier who assailed
That out I ran and search'd the forest o'er.
But there are times, when those that love the bay,
Her name was Jane, and neighbour's children we,
No man like him the horn could sound.
Flutter'd and laugh'd, and oft-times through the throng
and those sprinkled on the ivy-woven beds of primroses underneath the
Where is the foe that ever saw their back?
Weel-featured, weel-tocher'd, weel-mounted and braw;
Charming the eye with dread,--a matchless cataract,
Seek not the proofs in private life to find;
Shiver upon thee--sanctuary and home
Falling for France, whose rights he battled to resume.
Whose tips are glowing hot. The legend cheers
And she lo'ed her bonnie laddie dear;
Farewell, thou stream that winding flows
And by the church, and o'er the down,
In bare and desolated bosoms: mute
For me! sae laigh I needna bow,
About the labyrinth in his soul of love.
Choicer than the Mermaid Tavern?
And Betty's face with joy o'erflows,
And others go and follow to the chin,
Mild be the sun on this sweet blushing flower,
The pasture cows that herded on the moor
The sweetest flower that deck'd the mead,
To you a simple Bardie's prayers
Oer treeless fens of many miles.
The snow falls deep; the forest lies alone;
Seest thou thy lover lowly laid?
From her bare bosom let me take my fill,
If, in their random, wanton spouts,
When disappointment snaps the clue of hope,
Of huge Enceladus swallow'd it in wrath:
Full fifty comely sheep I raised,
Then by the bed-side, where the faded moon
And come like a clear sun-rise to my mind;
Oh, the world is all too rude for thee, with much ado and care;
Around the yard, their nightly fast to break,
For Matthew's course was bright;
Star'd, where upon their heads the cornice rests,
Whate'er it strikes;--yon head is doubly sacred now.
To thee I turn with swimming eyes;
Crest their fringed waves, plunge onward and are past.
Let posts an' pensions sink or soom
The Veteran's skill--Youth's fire--and Manhood's heart of steel?
His was harsh penance on St. Agnes' Eve:
Now coming from beneath the forest trees,
Pass by--she heeded not at all: in vain
And the rent canvass fluttering strew the gale,
Summer's pleasures they are gone like to visions every one,
His knowledge with old notions still combined
Bathing my spirit in a new delight.
Asking for her lost Basil amorously;
An' twa red peats wad send relief,
The deil's awa, the deil's awa,
Come, join the melancholious croon
O kindly muse! let not my weak tongue faulter
That I might greet, that I might cry,
Cynthia! I cannot tell the greater blisses,
And my last hold of earth is gane:
And laws for Scotland's weal ordain'd;
The glow-worm burnishes its lamp anew
Quoth Betty "he will soon be here,
Thou quackery of the harassed heart,
Deface the scenes, already how defaced!
Asham'd himsel' to see the wretches,
And your friends daurna say ye hae mair.
Though friendly praise hath but its hour.
With paths of gravel finely clouted;
But cannot hope for rest before.
And groans, which, as they said, would make a dead man start.
Wi' alter'd voice, quoth I, sweet lass,
As for your Priesthood, I shall say but little,
And o'er him many changing scenes must roll
Though it be quick and sharp enough to blight
Cauld blew the bitter-biting north
That falls through the clear ether silently.
And ye'll hae a calf's-head o' sma' value.
Unchangeable save to thy wild waves' play,
From loftier rocks new loveliness survey,
And old crooked stiles to rest upon;
Perchance she died in youth--it may be, bowed
In winter time of all the world was I.
Thy soul of care, by heavens, I would offer
And strives in vain to unsettle and wield
Men and their thoughts; 'twas wise to feel, not so
May hing their head in woefu' bevel,
Were long be-nightmar'd. Angela the old
Sometimes these very pangs. Dear maiden, steal
Endymion from Glaucus stood apart,
An' there will be Murray commander,
Dwells here and there with people of no name,
hazels, whitethorns and maples are so like gold beads that I stooped
And, quite convinced with the proofs it gives,
Below thir stanes lie Jamie's banes:
A semblance where there's nought to spare.
Though every common's gone and though traps are set to kill
On sweet silk grass I stretch me at mine ease,
For which the Palace of the present hour
The rosy checks o' bonnie Mary.
Of the wide spheres--an everlasting tone.
By strewn flowers, torches, and a marriage song,
I would thy shade were ever near;
Tis sad to strive and speak in vain,
Farewell, farewell, Eliza dear,
Should cower beneath what, in comparison,
Yet not insensible to all which here
I'll spier nae courtier's leave."
But now she's floating down the Nith,
While recollection's pow'r is given,
And thine, whose buds are on the shoot,
They a' are mine, and they shall be thine,
And on her hair a glory, like a saint:
Sent me by sad Vertumnus, when his fears
When floods covered every bough,
A serpent's plashy neck; its barbed tongue
But now my blood shall not sink in the ground--
Might well award him Muir and Palmer's fate:
While the rude winds blow off each shadowy crown.
A bony heap, through ages to remain,
And be a criminal."--"Alas, I burn,
Whose cheeks health flushes with as sweet a red
Why linger you so, the wild labyrinth strolling?
Thous know'st the snares on ev'ry hand--
Poor Betty! it would ease her pain
The bodiless thought? the Spirit of each spot?
To one so young my strain I would commend,
Beneath its base are Heroes' ashes hid--
And laid the sheaf upon the ground
'Twere drink for first of human kind,
I'd heeze thee up a constellation,
Thou shalt, at one glance, behold
The battle closes thick and bloody;
We sought the hollow ash that was shelter from the rain,
And when he is restor'd, thou, fairest dame,
Who christen'd thus Maria's lyre divine;
For us and for our stage should ony spier,
Wheel carriages I ha'e but few,
First touch'd; what amorous, and fondling nips
The graip he for a harrow taks,
Her lute-string gave an echo of his name,
One hour dies silent oer the sleepy woods,
There's nought can bribe his honest will.
To me, though to none else, a not ungrateful theme.
Picture out each lovely meaning:
They brought their happy burthens. What a kiss,
Actions of rage and passion; even as
Dead grass, horse hair, and downy-headed bents
In us such love and reverence from afar,
To more immediate matter. Woe, alas!
I cannot see--but darkness, death and darkness.
The hazel bush o'erhangs the thrush,
Yet ever well inclined to heal the wound;
For simple sheep; and such are daffodils
To thole the winter's sleety dribble,
If thou hadst heard her talking,
Has thy fair face within its tranquil ken,
And then he'll hilch, and stilt, and jimp,
My father will be looking out--
"I know what was, I feel full well what is,
Half doubting whether it be floods or wind,
Now wide awake, the vision of her sleep:
The meeting cliffs each deep-sunk glen divides,
Were slanting out their necks with loosened rein;
Thy weeping's sairer on my heart,
Her strappan limb and gausy middle
An' now my dying charge I gie him,
But though her tears stood watering in her eye,
And she, whom once the semblance of a scar
The empty loom, cold hearth, and silent wheel,
Thus on her knees did Goody pray,
And still I can join in a cup or a song;
Amang the friends of early days!
He singeth loud his godly hymns
In formless jumble, right an' wrang,
But the least motion which they made,
And the wolf dies in silence--not bestowed
Go on, my Lord! I lang to meet you,
Chilled are those lips you've kissed so warm,
Or, nae reflection on your lear,
But spare me--spare me, Lucy dear!
How happy once again in grassy nest!
And cowslip peeps have gotten eer so big,
Their birth, their blood, and that sublime record
One morn we stroll'd on our dry walk,
She ay shall bless that happy night,
There never liv'd a mortal man, who bent
And Power and Pomp their all resign,
The common heath, became the spoiler's prey;
How dull is that ear which to flattery so listen'd!
The dance gaed thro' the lighted ha',
I clasp my countless treasure, O,
Ere I had heard of Martha's name,
The bees hum round the breathing flowers;
Soon after they arrived in that new world,
When the fire flashes from a warrior's eye,
His dog among the bushes barking high;
And spen't at night fu' brawlie;
They should not know thee, who athirst to gain
Perhaps this hour, in misery's squalid nest,
Said the tinker: If I could but drink of his vein
Starts from its belt--he rends his captive's chains,
And streaks his listless limbs;
And plight me your lily white hand;
Tell her she staw the bishop's mare,
A blush of coral. Copious wonder-draughts
And ev'n his matchless hand with finer touch inspir'd!
Gave with a maiden's true good will
Hark! from the Mosque the nightly solemn sound,
Like stars to shepherd's eyes:--'twas but a meteor beamed.
To Halls deserted, portals gaping wide:
His social, friendly, honest heart,
Bears in his cap the badge of crimson hue,
Leaving old Sleep within his vapoury lair.
"And carried Johnny to the wood."
And yearns, so nature's lessons teach,
Supplied, to him were more than mines of gold.
And take a dream 'mong rushes Stygian,
Breath'd from the hinges, as the ample span
Yet held my recollection, even as one
A little noiseless noise among the leaves,
More tame for his gray hairs--Alas me! flit!
From the clear moon, the trees, and coming madness.
Their sceptre's sway'd by other hands;
And having sold his master's sheep,
And nothing else saw all day long,
Yon auld grey stane, amang the heather,
When chapman billies leave the street,
But feels his heart's bluid rising hot,
Through all the long green fields has spread,
My bonny lass, I work in brass,
Cooler than all the wonders he had seen,
Thy name is on my tongue, I know not how;
That I have sigh'd for: with so deadly gasp
To lose in grieving all my maiden prime.
Anxious her lips, her breathing quick and short:
In Homer's craft Jock Milton thrives;
And the imperial pleasure.--Wherefore not?
Remember he's his country's stay,
With not a thing to sigh for, or to seek,
The harbour-bay was clear as glass,
So to heaven's gates the lark's shrill song ascends,
A voice, he had been froze to senseless stone;
Auld Truth hersel' might swear ye're fair,
And teach the sportive younkers round,
Winnows the air till in the cloud she sings,
Here, where men sit and hear each other groan;
Here pierceth not, impregnate with disease:
An' fareweel cheerfu' tankards foamin',
For in the moonlight he had been
Thou could hae gaen like onie staggie
In sleep did I behold the skies,
A portion of the tempest and of thee!
The woodland oaks and all below
Doves will I offer up, and sweetest store
Who but would deem their bosoms burned anew
In form and shape compact and beautiful,
A dreary nakedness the field deforms--
Large wings upon my shoulders, and point out
To wander wherewithal and find its joys?
Kissing its cries away as these awake;--
His little, faithful mate to cheer,
I canna say by ye strunt rarely,
Sae merrily the banes we'll byke,
But mixed with pangs to Love's even loveliest hours decreed.
For aye unsought for slept among his ashes cold.
There is a paly flame of hope that plays
It may escape the courtly sparks,
But oh! how unlike marble was that face:
Beneath the stroke of Heaven's avenging ire;
They tried to dig, but, safe from danger's way,
Alang the burn to steer, my jo;
And how Tam stood, like ane bewitch'd;
Of our infection, till too late and long
Ye elements!--in whose ennobling stir
A sovereign quell is in his waving hands;
Before whose sons I'm honoured to appear!
Wraps round her ample robe with happy trembling.
Yeaned in after times, when we are flown,
The toper said nothing but wished the quart full
They toom'd their pocks, an' pawn'd their duds,
Ere her bower key was turned on two
But we'll hae ane frae 'mang oursels,
That, while a lassie, she had worn,
While green grass beneath me lies,
And she forgot the dells where waters run,
And as to trees the willows wear
Heaving in pain, and horribly convuls'd
O let me lead her gently o'er the brook,
Their marble being: now, as deep profound
Fair maid, be pitiful to my great woe.
In deepest grass, beneath the whisp'ring roof
Was offering up a hecatomb of vows,
The chiel that's a fool for himsel',
Should I believe, my coaxin' billie,
A thing of beauty is a joy for ever:
And such joys as these she'll bring.--
When wild war's deadly blast was blawn
That such fair clusters should be rudely torn
These pleasant names of places but I leave a sigh behind,
'Twill make a man forget his woe;
No sighs but sigh-warm kisses, or light noise
"O! why has worth so short a date?
And weel does Selkirk fa' that.
May fireside discords jar a base
The English maiden blushes down the dance,
And lucent syrops, tinct with cinnamon;
O Attic shape! Fair attitude! with brede
And the bands grew the tighter the more they were wet.
Strong mem'ry on my heart shall write
In will, in action free, companionship,
The old dames, jealous of their whispered praise,
To what would one day dwindle that which made
A young mind from its bodily tenement.
Their snowy breasts bedaubed with dirt,
The gloomy lantern, and the dim blue match,
But as the murmuring surge. Chilly and numb
Wishin' the ten Egyptian plagues
To where the great God lives for evermore.
Old Farmer Simpson did maintain,
Our ready minds to fellowship divine,
But yet he drew the mortal trigger
Lang may his whistle blaw, Jamie;
All this rushed with his blood--Shall he expire
Thou art my executioner, and I feel
And Betty's still at Susan's side:
Is there, beneath love's noble name,
And they are gone: ay, ages long ago
Is lighten'd:--that serene and blessed mood,
That makes her lov'd at home, rever'd abroad:
Beneath the hazels spreading wide?
Behind great Dian's temple. I'll be yon,
Like brothers they'll stand by each other,
Lustre into the sun, and put cold doom
Visit my Cytherea: thou wilt find
In chariots, lolling at their ease,
Thus nature's human link and endless thrall,
But spare and pardon my fause love,
Should she refuse, I'll lay my dead
And eye that scorcheth all it glares upon;
And I one day the rash neglect should mourn;
The finny darter with the glittering scales,
The Pilgrim rested here his weary feet,
The young men all fall to remarking,
And craggy isles, and sea-mew's plaintive cry
Upon the last few steps, and with spent force
But now the supper crowns their simple board,
Here's a health to them that's awa;
His ancles they are swoln and thick
They're a' run deils an' jads thegither.
Its prickly knobs the dews of morn
I, thro' the tender gushing tear,
That smiles sae sweetly on her knee;
Fill with thy fame the youth of many a shore;
At apish distance; but as yet none have,
To gather matter for a serious piece;
Ochon! for poor Castalian drinkers,
They gaz'd upon Endymion. Enchantment
Amidst this wreck, where thou hast made a shrine
All ready to set sail, with a fresh and steady gale:
To him her dripping hand she softly kist,
What are this world's true joys,--ere the great voice,
And, like the monarch of the wood,
At last they felt the kernel of the grave,
His old right hand lay nerveless, listless, dead,
Flowers whose wild odours breathe but agonies,
By daily abstinence and nightly prayer;
Till for eloquence you hail him,
My heart so potently? When yet a child
But none came home to fill his rack,
Not savage, for he saw full many a God
I'll mind you still, tho' far awa'.
Cathedrals call'd. He bade a loth farewel
Altho' the night were ne'er sae wild,
To speak:--O turn thee to the very tale,
Came tragic; passion not to be subdued,
And purblind amid foggy, midnight wolds.
And brav'd the mighty monarchs of the world.--
Dismay'd; and, like a wretch from whom the rack
So he became a very learned youth.
He ground severe his skull, with open mouth
Bright as the humming-bird's green diadem,
We may deplore and struggle with the coil,
Dance in the soft breeze in a fairy mass;
To which it mounts, as if to break the link
The warmest mirth on coldest nights.
Uphill, down brae, till some mishanter,
Brave Granby's head, De Grosse's grand defeat;
And for fair Scotia, hame again,
It's pride, and a' the lave o't--
They told her how, upon St. Agnes' Eve,
But thou, Clitumnus ! in thy sweetest wave
What may the fruit be yet?--I know not--Cain was Eve's.
He listen'd, and he wept, and his bright tears
And shield me frae the rain, jo.
Of thy wild eyes. Oh! yet a little while
Hail Poesie! thou Nymph reserv'd!
"What can I do to ease your pain?
In daring song is ill pourtrayed,
For ages: in the grand ancestral line
Yet never met with that surprise
Their zealous herds are vex'd an' sweatin':
Thy powers were past such little thorns,
Then the toper sat down with a hiccup and felt
Fresh lessons to the thinking bosom, how
Love's tickling nick-nacks and the laughing jest,
The bleezin, curst, mischievous monkeys
Nor learn that tempted Fate will leave the loftiest Star.
In trouth, I dare na venture, Sir.
Bright Phoebus ne'er witness'd so joyous a core,
Tho' I should herd the buckskin kye
For those have been more sad than I,
My Nannie's charming, sweet, an' young;
But blate, an laithfu', scarce can weel behave;
Triumphant Sylla!  Thou, who didst subdue
Thou art? Is this a boon so kindly given,
Of thine imperial garment, shall deny
O I never dreamed of parting or that trouble had a sting,
(Hey, and the rue grows bonnie wi' thyme),
Quick cat's-paws on the generous stray-away,--
Then hey for a lass wi' a tocher;
Came, where beneath the trees a faggot blazed;
And Phorcus, sea-born, and together strode
Yet in thy presence, lovely fair,
There saw the swan his neck of arched snow,
And clos'd her een amang the dead.
Had stamped her image in me, and even so,
Who thinks that wanton thing is won by sighs;
Green'd over April's lap? No howling sad
May hear, well pleas'd, the language of the soul;
In the fountain's pebbly margin, and she stood
A thousand Altars rise, for ever blazing bright.
Woe to the conquering, not the conquered host,
The wife slade cannie to her bed,
To spirits of the air, and visions wide:
Thou, Carian lord, hadst better have been tost
Perfection whisper'd passing by,
Enclosure like a Buonaparte let not a thing remain,
There's death in the cup--sae beware!
And, as the meanest knave a dog can brag,
But first a little patience; first undo
Or keeping watch among those starry seven,
And felt the very earth they trod a slave,
His little range of water was denied;[2]
Such government and thought there seem to be;
First on the sexes' intermix'd connexion,
And still, a sleeping, held her finger-tips
Flit down the hedgerows in the frozen plain
Oh! I am come to the low countrie,
Our brightest brother, still is undisgraced--
I thought some Fate with pleasure or with strife
Death, oft I've fear'd thy fatal blow,
Of joy that ever pour'd from heaven.
Though I have marked her when none other hath,
As ye were nine year less than thretty,
And by these tenderest, milky sovereignties--
An' gif it's sae, ye sud be licket
We'll hide the cooper behind the door;
That brings us pleasant weather:
As moon-struck bards complain, by Love's sad archery.
Sad wonder, and his yet surviving page
Mocking the sunshine in their glittering wings,
Were ye but here, what would ye say or do!
And scatter'd many a lusty splinter,
For one short hour; no, even as the trees
And waste life's summer-health in riot rude,
Oft of one wide expanse had I been told
A mask that like the gorget show'd,
Myself to thee. Ah, dearest, do not groan
The slanderous things that secret passed before:
Who on my fair one satire's vengeance hurls?
Were unto him companionship; they spake
To gie the rascals their deserts,
By heaven! the sacrilegious dog
Where not a beam, nor air, nor leaf is lost,
For ye are names no Time nor Tyranny can blight.
Had brought me a gem from the fret-work of heaven;
What when a stout unbending champion awes
Snaw-white stockins on his legs,
My gallant braw John Highlandman.
Beautiful things made new, for the surprise
We wither from our youth, we gasp away--
She to the mountain-top would go,
Bearing the burden of a shepherd song;
Dims the green beauties of thine Attic plain?
At nothing; just as though the earnest frown
His features were so lifeless. Suddenly
And there is dying in an hospital."
And into mountains cheats the eyes.
Once more upon the woody Apennine--
Before the fierce witch, speaking thus aloud
First in the race that led to Glory's goal,
So that we feel uplifted from the world,
'Till white in ase they're sobbin';
'Till his wee curlie John's-ier-oe,
Is proof to all other temptation.
Call'd up a thousand thoughts to envelope
Let us entwine hoveringly--O dearth
Let me fair Nature's face descrive,
Though parting from that mother he did shun;
How never-halting moments speed,
The bright blue waters with a fanning wind,
Is that old man? I cannot bring to mind
I'm thinking wi' sic a braw fellow,
That, sheening far, celestial seems to be,
Then lost his way, ae misty day,
Of hollow counsel, the false oracle,
But Venus, bending forward, said: "My child,
The twa best herds in a' the wast,
Contending with Billy for proud-nodding laurels.
At hame, a-fiel', at work, or leisure,
Still to the last it rankles, a disease,
To helpless children! then, O then! he feels
'Tis more like heaven to come than what _has_ been.
Ye fisher herons, watching eels:
Mansions that would disgrace the building taste
This, too, a covert shall insure
I view that noble, stately dome,
'Mid the green mountains many and many a song
To meddle wi' mischief a-brewing;
Unto the temperate air: then high it soar'd,
Is of too wide, too rainbow-large a scope,
Where _on_ the heart and _from_ the heart we took
I'll say't, she never brak a fence,
And I will sell my park and hall;
Yet not in vain our mortal race hath run--
Sever'd from thee can I survive?
I see before me the Gladiator  lie:
My seven braw sons for Jamie drew sword,
Disclos'd the thunder-gloomings in Jove's air;
In beauteous vassalage, look up and wait.
With the green world they live in; and clear rills
Of having heard the newcome nightingale.
It's a' for the hiney he'll cherish the bee;
In nature and the language of the sense,
Their annual round have driv'n,
His bonnet rev'rently is laid aside,
All eyes be muffled, or a hundred swords
When hailstanes drive wi' bitter skyte
Trembling beneath the scourge of Turkish hand,
They banished him beyond the sea,
The meadow grass turned up and copt,
In meek-eyed moods and ever balmy trills!
And Ardennes  waves above them her green leaves,
Tully was not so eloquent as thou,
I'm no mistrusting Willie Pitt,
Speak out, an' never fash your thumb!
Mulciber's columns gleam in far piazzian line.
Of ocean fades upon him; then, anew,
I'm dwindled down to mere existence,
"I'm here, what is't you want with me?"
Appear no more before Thy sight
As she is fam'd to do, deceiving elf.
It has been said, dear George, and true I hold it,
The very sense of where I was might well
Who, thus far, discontent, has dared to tread,
The lightning falls with never a jag
For that unnatural retribution--just,
So came these words and went; the while in tears
Against his lineage: not one breast affords
And I did feel his happiness mine own,
In such dismay my prayers and tears were vain:
She fathoms eddies, and runs wild about
The winds of heaven blew, the ocean roll'd
Then did the boy his tongue unlock,
Him whose wondrous work thou art;
For I have been accustomed to entwine
But, Mousie, thou art no thy lane,
The crows upon the swelling hills,
On music, and pleasure, and love.
As, hopeless, I muse on thy charms:
And one, to give her counsels more effect,
Held struggle with his throat but came not forth;
Like a stoop'd falcon ere he takes his prey.
Ah! rather let me like a madman run
The blankets were thin, and the sheets they were sma',
And little mouse that leaves its hole at eve
"Think you, mid all this mighty sum
Was rushing by the ruin'd wa's,
With the wild flock that never needs a fold;
Stake on a chance a farmer's stack-yard,
The grass, the thicket, and the fruit-tree wild;
Birds--beasts of prey--and wilder men appear,
And past and present both as one?
I've paid enough for her already,
Walks oer the gate he opened yesternight.
Oh, thou Parnassus! whom I now survey,
And right from wrong can tell, if ye'll but do't:
No, nor when supper came, nor after that,--
The very darkness smiles to wear
First nam'd these notes a melancholy strain;
An' ay the tither shot he thumpit,
I would not bode of evil, if I thought
And whistled, as he were a bird himself:
He'll shade my banks wi' tow'ring trees,
From my dear native land! Ah, foolish maid!
Oh, happier thought! can we be made the same:--
And, all unsexed, the Anlace  hath espoused,
Mark yonder pomp of costly fashion
There the spotted cow gets food, bonny Mary O!
'Tis not that fatal deadly shore;
The fly's bass turned a lion's roar;
Question that thus it was; long time they lay
That maks us mair than princes;
While hopes, and joys, and pleasures fly him,
The greybeard, old Wisdom, may boast of his treasures,
Through the sad heart of Ruth, when, sick for home,
And let the clouds of even and of morn
What trace remaineth of the Thunderer's shrine?
He watches well, but none a bit can spare,
We know her woof, her texture; she is given
A hope beyond the shadow of a dream.
The deil cam' fiddling through the town,
Which though sometimes they frown, yet rarely anger dames.
As heretofore, because Ambition was self-willed.
And the thyme it is wither'd, and rue is in prime.
Beneath old Scotia's smiling eye;
Poor Jane's last bed unchristian-like was made;
Of worthless dust, which from thy boasted line
How in the noon of night that pibroch thrills,
When Shelburne meek held up his cheek,
No one who once the glorious sun has seen,
And feedeth still, more comely than itself?
As large, as bright, as colour'd as the bow
When you were gone my limbs were stronger,
Just like a sark, or pair o' shoon,
Low sunk in squalid, unprotected age,
Partridge distant partridge greets;
The wretch whase doom is, "hope nae mair."
Hast thou a symbol of her golden hair?
Chasing the wild deer, and following the roe--
Was struck, and all were dreamers. At the last
Wi' screw'd up grace-proud faces;
In cowcribs, like a coach, to France,
O Goddess! hear these tuneless numbers, wrung
To gnash my gums, to weep and wail,
From chain-swung censer teeming;
Round the wealthy, titled bride:
So while the Poet stood in this sweet spot,
The lamps shone o'er fair women and brave men;
For not the faintest motion could be seen
Of tender joy wilt thou remember me,
And so she pined, and so she died forlorn,
Ye weel may wi' the fairest place:
Out the dark mysteries of human souls
Guid Christian blood to draw, man:
But ere she gave creating labour o'er,
That counsel might in dangers show,
Welcomes the rapid moments, bids them part,
The next wakes loud with unexpected storms;
The trays are up, the hedges broken down,
The mosses of thy Fountain  still are sprinkled
War for their chains, and rather than be free,
Ye'll find mankind an unco squad,
Of selfish grief or gladness--so it fling
What can a young lassie do wi' an auld man?
My Friend, and my Friend's Sister! we have learnt
And ay' he catch'd the tither wretch,
Noosing with care a bursting purse,
Almost crackt like a bucket when left in the sun.
Itself, and strives its own delights to hide--
I never did disgrace their blood;
The tither's something dour o' treadin',
Of all the Gods, whose dreadful images
As wooed the eye, and thrilled the Bosphorus along.
I was to top the heavens. Dear maid, sith
Thou drank wi' Kirton Jean till Monday.
His altar the high places, and the peak
I sold a sheep as they had said,
Shall scare that infant thunderer, rebel Jove,
And passing even into my purer mind
I've seen the bud upo' the timmer,
Wilt be content to dwell with her, to share
My lips to thine, that they may richly feast
Of mistress, friends, and wealth bereav'd me,
As yet such are around thee,--but thy fire
As he frae Ayr ae night did canter,
'Mong shepherds gone in eld, whose looks increas'd
While past the vision went in bright array.
By any touch, a bunch of blooming plums
It just play'd dirl on the bane,
For ilka man that's drunk's a lord.
If from the lover thou maun flee,
Were busiest, into that self-same lawn
Corinthians! look upon that gray-beard wretch!
By calm reflection, softened are and still;
And now and then a mournful smile would raise
Thea! Thea! Thea! where is Saturn?"
Disdain his power, and from their rocky hold
O sweetly, soundly, weel may he sleep
Her face so long in Corinth, where, she said,
Held her in peace: so that a whispering blade
Of thine harmonious sisters keep in tune
Such the ungentle sport that oft invites
"O man! while in thy early years,
I sell'd them a' just ane by ane;
Thou bure the bard through many a shire?
The tender thrill, the pitying tear,
Should sad Despondency my musings fright,
How sune it tines its scent and hue
And O, how the heroes will swear!
To lie on a molehill and read the day long
As eager runs the market-crowd,
Because thy joy in both would be
The Boat came closer to the Ship,
Sweet Nightingale! once more, my friends! farewell.
To sit upon an Alp as on a throne,
For it's jet, jet black, an' it's like a hawk,
Freedom's sword will strongly draw,
And whose that generous princely mien,
How blest ye flow'rs that round her blaw,
Came slope upon the threshold of the west;
What wonder strikes the curious, while he views
That smile for which my breast might vainly sigh
But ah! how bootless to admire,
Of the goaded world; and Kosciusko's worn
For future years. And so I dare to hope
Honey from out the gnarled hive I'll bring,
One ant or two to carry, quickly then
And that one word were Lightning, I would speak;
And of those numbers every eye was wet;
It needs no Siddons' powers in Southerne's song;
And still the clap plays clatter.
Or tiny point of fairy scymetar;
Whose Spirit, antithetically mixed,
Ye, who have known what 'tis to dote upon
I was the Queen o' bonnie France,
These were the pledges of my love!
O'er-arching, mouldy, gloom-inspiring coves,
Down droops her ance weel-burnisht crest,
And a' that thou hast done for me!"
Tis pleasant in these quiet lonely places,
In bliss, till fate some day is sent,
Get up, she cried, thou false young man,
How cheery, thro' her shortening day,
It made sad Isabella's eyelids ache,
The "Planter of the Lion,"  which through fire
Full five and twenty years he lived
Close to a hill of ants where cowslips bloom
And life's poor season peaceful spend.
Even Satan glowr'd, and fidg'd fu' fain,
Beanstalks beset with pods from end to end,
We can recall such visions, and create,
At night, at morning, and at noon,
And sweet affection prove the spring of woe."
The very stanes that Adam bore,
And once as he was working in the cellar,
For some had gentlefolks to please,
It hard, and heavy steel: but that indeed
Keep watchings with the nightly thief:
Where oft the stormy winter gale
Paining with eloquence her balmy side;
What ails thee?" He could bear no more, and so
By her glad Lycius sitting, in chief place,
And touch'd with shade of bronzed obelisks,
'Gainst the hot season; the mid forest brake,
Are bred in sic a way as this is.
Of knee from knee, nor ankles pointing light;
The muckie devil blaw ye south,
The flapping sail hauled down to halt for logs like these!
One of shell-winding Triton's bright-hair'd daughters?
All effort seems forgotten, one to whom
For Nature made her what she is,
Nae langer thrifty citizens an' douce,
This palace floor breath-air,--but for the amaze
I will forget them; I will pass these joys;
And seeks his squalid camp, half hid in snow,
Who lov'd--and music slew not? 'Tis the pest
O' saunts; tak that, ye lea'e them naething
My mind to meditate what then it learned,
It swells, it buds, it flowers beneath his sight;
Then catch the moments as they fly,
Says the toper, I've powder to charge a long gun,
But never elsewhere in one place I knew
But, Delia, more delightful still
The bonnie lass made the bed to me,
Of death among the bushes and the leaves,
The hour must come when such things shall be made
Joys far from cold restraints--not fearing pride--
O must none close my dying feet,
And the very grey breeks o' Tam Glen!
Sleep will come smoothly to my weary brow.
Until you on a crummock driddle
To spare thee now is past my pow'r,
Where little birds that soon at eve went in
He stoitered up an' made a face;
Cauld Boreas, wi' his boisterous crew,
Or prophesyings of the midnight lamp;
That thou wilt work them, hot and cauld,
She bawls her story all the way;
Us live in peace, in love and peace among
Now Phoebus cheers the crystal streams,
Saving a tythe which love still open kept,
The might of Alfred, and the shaft of Tell;
And must they fall? the young, the proud, the brave,
Where, without any word, from stabs he fell.
Didst never yet one mortal song inspire--
That ill they'll ne'er let near thee.
Auld Caledon drew out her drone,
Through and through the inspir'd leaves,
Nor oft I've seen such sight, nor heard such song,
And now I greet round their green beds in the yerd.
Are but a slime, a thin-pervading scum,
Over which thine eyebrows, leaning,
How I wad mourn, when it was torn
And from the basements deep to the high towers
With the remembrance of a grievous wrong,
Thou art a scholar, Lycius, and must know
Hear me not; but if calmly I have borne
Yet let me tell my sorrow, let me tell
"How cam'st thou over the unfooted sea?
In the old weedy hedge the leafy nest
Of disappointment stuck in me so sore,
He well could love in grief: his faith he kept;
And thinks he een could walk upon their tops,
To shed thy blood, and drink the tears of thy distress;
The waters heave around me; and on high
Nor een a molehill cushion meet
The helpless poor mix with the orphan's cry;
To counterbalance all this evil;
Besides, on griefs so fresh my thoughts were brooding still.
For, saving your presence, to her ye're a saint;
And virgin's bower, trailing airily;
An' I'll ne'er lift a lawless leg
Ye powers who preside o'er the wind and the tide,
His soul will 'scape us--O felicity!
Then all hell will fly for fear,
Pass we the long unvarying course, the track
When busy clamorous crowds intrude,
And here the buzz of eager nations ran,
I've been thy guide; that thou must wander far
For thou hast brought their promise to an end.
Still must I on; for I am as a weed,
Till tales are done and talk has nought to say.
Was the ploughman laddie dancin'.
I doubt na, lass, but ye may think,
Thy rough, rude fortress gleams afar,
Aye, so delicious is the unsating food,
The bum-clock humm'd wi' lazy drone;
Now tiger-passion'd, lion-thoughted, wroth,
The hawthorns here were hung with may,
So Saturn, as he walk'd into the midst,
O let me melt into thee; let the sounds
Bright ran thy line, O Galloway,
It's no the loss o' warl's gear,
My sense, as though of hemlock I had drunk,
And taper fulgent catching at all things,
And on her couch low murmuring "Where? O where?"
Be't water-brose, or muslin-kail,
Make you as poor a dog as I am,
I curse not, for my heart is lost in thine
And thou, old forest, hold ye this for true,
Large dock leaves, spiral foxgloves, or the glow
Thy life is waning now, and silence tries
Ye'll quake at his conjuring hammer,
Is this the Hill? Is this the Kirk?
I cannot tell; but while he laughs,
But formed for all the witching arts of love:
Two forms are slowly shadowed on my sight--
For her I'll trace a distant shore,
The leaves of willow and of adder's tongue;
Beside this old man lay a pearly wand,
Whiles owre a bush wi' downward crush
In the present strength of manhood, that the high
"Tweet" pipes the robin as the cat creeps by
Dropping dews and breathing balm,
Before this ponderous globe itself
Travel the country thro' and thro',
Hath heard a pause of silence: till the Moon
Na, faith ye yet! ye'll no be right
'Twill mak her poor auld heart, I fear,
An' runts o' grace the pick and wale,
For men I've three mischievous boys,
The billows broke above the ship and left us all below.
And cooling winds swoon into faultering gales;
"But they are dead; those two are dead!
Until at length old Saturn lifted up
From the ploughboy's heavy shoon;
The victim sad of fortune's strife,
The unreached Paradise of our despair,
The ship rides by the Berwick-law,
And know so little of their farms the while
An' gar the tattered gypsies pack
And venerably simple--such as raise
And hear these altars o'er the long-reluctant brine.
Choicer than the Mermaid Tavern?
Oh! flickering, feeble, and unsicker
That I may see thy beauty through the night;
And trembles through my labyrinthine hair."
Black with the miner's blast, upon her height
Her and her hoped-for seed, whose promise seemed
By every wind that nods the mountain pine,
Canst throw uncommon light, man,
A cobweb hiding disappointment's thorn,
The saddle--it was all he bore--
"Here, where the sword united nations drew,
Upon their root-fringed grains to mark
But a bonnie, westlin weaver lad
Of snow lie drifted, that all entrance stops
Portion'd us--happy days, or else to die;
And crimson mouthed shells with stubborn curls,
Sit round the table, weel content,
Wi' braw new branks in mickle pride,
Which shall not whelm me, let me not have worn
And ay she shook the temper-pin.
The cypress--hear the owl--and plod your way
To mend the honest patriot-lore,
On the roly poly up and downs of pleasant Swordy Well,
The cock upon the dunghill crowing,
Would then my noble master please
A harmless soul, with no abusive tongue,
Imploring for her Basil to the last.
The little strawy bents and nodding flowers,
But can they melt the glowing heart,
And with a fresher growth replenishing the void.
Flush'd angerly: while sometimes eagle's wings,
Hiding its nest in holes from fickle spring
'Tis not content so soon to be alone.
Forms pleasant clumps, through which the soothing winds
Nor envious death so triumph'd in a blow,
And make its silvery splendour pant with bliss.
Written in star-light on the dark above:
Ye Stars! which are the poetry of Heaven!
I left the lines and tented field,
That is a doubtful tale from faery land,
Of true devotion monkish incense burns,
By my diligent springs; my level lilies, shells,
And eating awes like sugarplums ere they had lost the may,
You'd think they're members when you heard them prate;
Old Father Time deputes me here before ye,
And wishing in his heart twas summer-time again.
And who but young Robin his sen?
Had I to guid advice but harkit,
To as sweet a silence, when I 'gan retrace
The wrath of thy own wrongs, or reap the due
Man's voice was on the mountains; and the mass
And said, "At Kilve I'd rather be
And fix your claws in Nicol's heart,
Twa drifted heaps sae fair to see;
In wood and thicket over the wide grove
Where gold and pearls and mystery
And play about the water half the day.
Clear was the song from Philomel's far bower;
How, coming with his startled horse,
Such morning incense from the fields of May,
That had no need of a remoter charm,
Learn three-mile pray'rs an' half-mile graces,
His sluggish form reposing motionless.
Catch at each object passing bye,
While, like held breath, the stars drew in their panting
So hath it proved to thee, and all such lot who choose.
So passed another day, and so the third:
The last poor plunder from a bleeding land:
The gift still dearer, as the giver, you.
Whiles glow'ring round wi' prudent cares,
Of some strange history, potent to send
He follow'd through a lowly arched way,
Save Admiration glancing harmless by:
The rain pours down from one black cloud
I was come round about the hill,
O what a wild and harmonized tune
Hogs with grumbling, deafening noise,
Say, maiden, wilt thou go with me
The Bards of Hell and Chivalry: first rose
At howes or hillocks never stumbled,
"What can I do?" says Betty, going,
May know his freezing sorrows more.
Proud though in desolation--which could find
That ev'ry naig was ca'd a shoe on,
These hours, and only these, redeem Life's years of ill!
Perhaps if bowls row right, and right succeeds,
Beckoning hints to those that roam,
"My stockings there I often knit,
The breezes blew, the white foam flew,
But New Light herds gat sic a cowe,
Which whips and cudgels neer increased a jot,
In the make of that wonderful creature, call'd man,
For here Johnny Pidgeon had nane!
The range of flower'd Elysium. Thus did fall
The time-worn arch, the fallen dome,
And here is manna pick'd from Syrian trees,
Sooner the sun in his motion would falter.
And poesied with hers in dewy rhyme:
Or may I never leave my grave among the dead."
Leaving a trickling dew. At last they shot
Deal round to happy fools its speechless obloquy.
Till earth right loath the proof to miss
The chield wha boasts o' warld's walth
Pass'd like a dream before him. Then the spur
Partly because they blend me with his line,
Sweet as the thyme that blossoms where she kneels;
And then to die alone. Who can devise
I loved the winds when I was young,
That brightness in her eye she bore when Rome was free!
Nearest to Heaven's, broke o'er a father's grave.
O wad some Power the giftie gie us
Don't mind whose character they spoil a pin:
Thou, who didst call the Furies from the abyss,
Needing no prayers; a sunset's happy close.
Fresher than berries of a mountain tree?
O, haud your tongue, now Nansie, O!
The sails were filled, and fair the light winds blew,
Within my breast; so that the morning light
Men would not take the stranger in.
Then Montague, an' Guilford, too,
Ye'll slip frae me like a knotless thread,
Their sceptre broken, and their sword in rust,
Then pleasure many a praise bestows
Their fellows fall before, like leaves of the same tree.
Where a sweet clime was breathed from a land
Is slung with shining cuirass, sword, and shield?
Oh, lovely Spain! renowned, romantic Land!
How sweet, and sweeter! for I heard a lyre,
and longs to see a letter with your name
Each bristl'd hair stood like a stake,
The dew of her rich speech: "Ah! Art awake?
Of their glory and their shame;
And, waddling, prate away to bed.
Of palm and plantain, met from either side,
The bonnie lasses weel may wiss him,
And slumber in the arms of melody,
The miller's horse tied to the old smithy door
Love but her, and love for ever.--
With throat unslack'd, with black lips bak'd
And send'st him, shivering in thy playful spray
I left the jilt, and tun'd my pipe
This wot ye all whom it concerns,
The thronged arena shakes with shouts for more;
To the board of Glenriddel our heroes repair,
For woman's wit and strength o' man,
Coming through the rye, poor body,
But soon may peace bring happy days
Which, sparkling to the twilight stars, infuse
Would'st thou be cur'd, thou silly, moping elf?
Writ in the tongue of heaven, by those souls
They lay aside their private cares,
And light blue mountains: but no breathing man
With the young ashen boughs, 'gainst which it rests,
And thus in thousand hugest phantasies
And like a new-born spirit did he pass
So leck'd the woodbine sweet yon aged tree;
O joy! for now I see ye are not lost:
Hast thou from the caves of Golconda, a gem
Poor Hughoc like a statue stan's;
Until a pow as auld's Methusalem
Her lake a sheet of silver, and her plain
For delvers, ditchers, an' sic cattle;
that I am obliged to stoop down as I walk to see if they are pearls,
To live in death and be the same,
Your pin wad help to mend a mill
_Which done, and all these labours ripened,
In other's arms, breathe out the tender tale,
Protect thee frae the driving show'r,
And thro' the drifts the snowy clifts
In either wing two champions fought,
But books are like the sea to joy,
His hoary head with water-lilies crown'd,
From crimes as numerous as her beadsmen be;
I wat she was a sheep o' sense,
"But, hark! I'll tell you of a plot,
Statues of glass--all shivered--the long file
To-morrow may bring us a halter.
The mustering squadron, and the clattering car,
Wi' nae kend face but Jenny Geddes.
When thou an' I were young an' skeigh,
To muster o'er each ardent Whig
O' double verse come gie us four,
For meikle glee and fun has he,
Four days are sped, but with the fifth, anon,
To battle with the Ocean and the shocks
Am sailing with thee through the dizzy sky!
Of light, and that is love: its influence,
How sweet his music; on my life
Makeshifts for leaves; and yet, so rich they show,
But will ye tell me, Master Cæsar,
Will stagnate all thy fountains:--tease me not
Sell my hose, and pawn my shoon,
And toothy critics by the score
Why, Lonsdale, thus thy wrath on vagrants pour?
Where Cart rins rowin to the sea,
Of blue Friuli's mountains;  Heaven is free
And taste of all that I forsake;
When the whole host of hatred stood hard by,
For silent, low, on beds of dust,
Since thou in all thy youth and charms,
And wha winna wish guid luck to our cause,
The star  which rises o'er her steep, nor climb?
But soon he knew himself the most unfit
Or the coy moon, when in the waviness
Whare gor-cocks thro' the heather pass,
Till I heard Chapman speak out loud and bold:
The de'il had business on his hand.
The thought of this great partnership diffuses
Flashing afar,--and at his iron feet
Inspire the highly-favour'd youth,
That little island, on the Atlantic sea,
Spirits which soar from ruin:--thy Decay
Wha cheerfully lays down the pack,
That little urn saith more than thousand Homilies.
What want these outlaws conquerors should have
They drank, bragged, and sung, and got merry together.
One, loveliest, holding her white band toward
Young feathor'd tyrant! by a swift decay
Thin grass and king-cups grow within the paths.
His royal heart was firm and true,
"A Serpent!" echoed he; no sooner said,
Half seen through deepest gloom, and griesly gapes,
Is there nae poet, burning keen for fame,
With all the venal soul of dedicating prose?
He shall deposit side by side, until
I had but a soak and neer rested for wind.
To usher back his spirit into life:
Of pains resistless! make my being brief,
Till past,--and then the cricket sings more strong,
And call it love? Alas, 'twas cruelty.
'Twas even--the dewy fields were green,
(I'm scant o' verse, and scant o' time,)
What are the laurels of the Cæsar's brow?
And mutter things kept secrets from the rest,
They were as thin, as sharp an' sma'
Where once beneath a monarch's feet
A Paphian dove upon a message sent?
Pleasure's palled Victim! life-abhorring Gloom
And see that oftentimes the reins would slip
Thy name shall circle round the gaping throng,
Forgets that Pride to pampered priesthood dear;
The moon is up--the sky is blue,
Like tipsy Joy that reels with tossing head.
And many times they bit their lips alone,
My dear, dear Friend, and in thy voice I catch
In the calm'd twilight of Platonic shades.
My musie, tir'd wi' mony a sonnet
And in the air, her new voice luting soft,
For honest men and bonny lasses.)
And danced awa wi' the Exciseman,
'Till ilka carlin swat and reekit,
And with a deep sadness I turned, to repair
Her 'prentice han' she try'd on man,
The little chapel with the cross above
This game was play'd in monie lands,
A listening the linnet, aft wanders my Jean.
While they maun stan', wi' aspect humble,
Rising with her tiara of proud towers
Thou beardless boy, I pray tak' care,
O a' the lang day I ca' at my hammer,
The flower and fancy o' the west;
And Havoc scarce for joy can number their array.
Wi' Chloris in my arms, be mine;
My midnight lamp--and what is writ, is writ,--
Come, let us stray our gladsome way,
Making slow way, with head and neck convuls'd
I do confess thou art sae fair,
I pass by hunders, nameless wretches,
Thus in my arms, wi' a' thy charms,
What swell'd with pathos, and what right divine:
O' a' the num'rous human dools,
Gie me the groat again, canny young man;
While here the little paths go through
"Ev'n them he canna get attended,
Averred, and known, and daily, hourly seen--
And glitter o'er the crystal streams,
From flashing scimitar to secret knife,
That on weak tendrils lowly creeping grow
Two bubbling springs of talk from their sweet lips.
So neighbour'd to him, and yet so unseen
And listen mony a grateful bird
And, turning round, laugh at the letter's close
Ye're but a pack o' traitor louns,
The Sprites that owre the brigs of Ayr preside.
Away!--there need no words, nor terms precise,
Or wi' his song her cares beguile:
Sown deep, even in the bosom of the North;
To raise a language, and his land reclaim
Of vine leaves. Then there rose to view a fane
Stretch'd on the grass at my best lov'd employment
"Now get thee hence, thou grey-beard Loon!
And gazing in thy face as toward a star,
Such was my life's deceitful morning,
Match me, ye climes! which poets love to laud;
He met within the murmurous vestibule
Among sere leaves and twigs, might all be heard.
Lowping an' flinging on a cummock,
Their fairest blossom'd beans and poppied corn;
yet to be great was charming, O:
Or frosty maids forsworn the dear embrace;
The sluggish wheels; solemn their toothed maws,
And workhouse prisons raised upon the site.
Just when the sun his farewell beam has darted:
Full palatable; and a colour grew
In courteous fountains to all cups outreach'd;
And drooping rich the dewy head,
And for thy potence vainly wished,
Which the emerald waves at your feet gladly threw.
O thou grim mischief-making chiel,
It mov'd and mov'd, and took at last
A sparrow's life's as sweet as ours.
But, och! that night, amang the shaws,
There, mountains to the skies were tost:
Saw in the sun a mighty angel stand;
Till vanished was the morning spring and set the summer sun
The youngling cottagers retire to rest:
Whoe'er thou art, O reader, know,
To feed her fair flocks by her green rustling corn;
'Tis three feet long, and two feet wide.
My cave wad be a lover's bower,
Flush every thing that hath a vermeil hue,
Would come no mystery? For me, dark, dark,
Passion or feeling, purpose, grief, or zeal,--
And they ha'e ta'en his very heart's blood,
Ripe fruits, and lonely couch, contentment gave;
He's there but a 'prentice I trow,
The fairest maid was bonnie Jean.
And long had fed his youthful appetite;
And whatsoe'er they were--are now but so:
Follow'd their languid mazes, till well nigh
For us repeopled were the solitary shore.
I wad nae gie a button for her.
Dempster, a true blue Scot I'se warran';
Or clench'd it quite: but too short was their bliss
Made for the soul to wander in and trace
One round--I ask it with a tear,--
I stood and wondered at the noise,
Of large extent, hard by a castle huge
Her air sae sweet, and shape complete,
I could not pray:--through tears that fell in showers,
Wae is my heart, and the tear's in my e'e;
Sweet flow'ret of the rural shade!
And O! sae nicely's we will fare;
For him who dared prefer a mortal bride:
And breathe thee whispers of its minstrelsy.
Grazes--the purest God of gentle waters!
Hear, how he gies the tither yell,
For guilt, for guilt, my terrors are in arms;
To wicked deeds I was inclined,
To seek the shepherd's hut beside the rushy plain.
An exil'd mortal, sounds its pleasant name!
Now Tam, O Tam! had thae been queans
Hang in thy vision like a tempting fruit,
Ae auld wheelbarrow, mair for token,
And not a wish to gild the gloom!
Wild sorceress! me thy restless mood delights,
Nibble the little cupped flowers and sing.
Yet they wha fa' in Fortune's strife,
Thou dost bless every where, with silver lip
Where castles stood and grandeur died.
He said: "I feel this thine endearing love
Just frets 'till Heav'n commission gies him:
Did take his way in solitary guise:
I took thee as my friendly host
Shou'd meddle wi' a pack sae sturdy,
And on he goes beneath the moon.
Where by the week he doth abide,
One faint eternal eventide of gems.
But ere these matchless heights I dare to scan,
Yet while they're only poind't and herriet,
Who lick yet loathe the hand that waves the sword
But Jealousy has fled: his bars, his bolts,
No longer will I court thy stay,
This while she's been in crankous mood,
Its sides I'll plant with dew-sweet eglantine,
And every height, and every sullen depth,
Leading it more in sorrow's way,
Last, she sublimes th' Aurora of the poles,
Essentially immortal, they create
With reconciling words and courteous mien
Says, "I will send the border-knight
This thorn you on your left espy;
I'm weary sick o't late and air!
To catch dame Fortune's golden smile,
Spiral through ruggedest loopholes, and thence
To look behind or make a noise;
Wi' dew are hanging clear, my jo;
With music wing'd instead of silent plumes,
And the moonbeam looks between,
Where flag-leaves spring beneath, or ramping sedge,
They told their sister how, with sudden speed,
With all its lines abrupt and angular:
Listen awhile ye nations, and be dumb.
On the green grass now lying, now mounting the hill,
We'll be constant while we can--
There was a sound of revelry by night,
First shore her wi' a kindly kiss,
But may she wintle in a widdie,
The palace proud, triumphal arch,
Is ever on himself, doth look on one,
"Guidman," quo' he, "put up your whittle,
The beautiful--the brave--the Lords of earth and sea,
*       *       *       *       *
So softly, Arethusa, that I think
It crack'd and growl'd, and roar'd and howl'd--
Had spent their malice, and the sullen rear
And frost will blight the fairest flowers,
The Cæsar's pageant,  shorn of Brutus' bust,
Ere long I will exalt thee to the shine
Although I found her thus, we did not part;
Prone to enjoy each pleasure riches give,
Nay, more, that very love their cause of ruin!
'Twas four long nights and days to shaving night:
Or mountain-built with peaceful citadel,
Then would I never grieve or sigh.
That in our aspirations to be great,
Far dearer to me yon lone glen o' green brockan,
Through bronzed lyre in tragic order go,
But, let me whisper, i' your lug,
An' ay on Sundays, duly, nightly,
With mingled bubblings and a gentle rush,
Though Dido silent is in under-grove,
Through the cold serpent-pipe refreshfully,--
As if for joy he would no further seek;
In Johnny's left-hand you may see,
O what a wretch is he! and when 'tis his,
Yet here's his health in water!
That adores thee and loves thee?
The deil ane will gie them his vote!
The very sepulchres lie tenantless
I die--I hear her voice--I feel my wing--"
By Langley Bush I roam, but the bush hath left its hill,
I jouk beneath misfortune's blows
Sweet closes the evening on Craigie-burn-wood,
Glance o'er this page, nor to my verse deny
My lady's gown, there's gairs upon't,
For when the world first saw the sun
And now she's at the pony's tail,
When I used to tie the willow boughs together for a swing,
O'er others' griefs that some sincerely grieve--
And oft in shining fields of green
Shading its Ethiop berries; and woodbine,
Can Man achieve without the friendly steed--
Of ancient Nox;--then skeletons of man,
And trusted to thy billows far and near,
Sae my auld stumpie pen I gat it
"When the blue day-light's in the sky,
That wont to bid the battle rage?
His cottage is a humble place of rest
But what is higher beyond thought than thee?
Takes glimpses of thee; thou art a relief
An' when you think upo' your mither,
That on his marriage-day sweet music made?
Wi' your priest-skelping turns,
And your friends daurna say ye hae mair,
And had he doted on those eyes so blue,
So what with them both there's no moving,
Far other scene is Thrasimene now;
And coward maukin sleep secure,
"You've done your best, and that is all."
And I bleer my een with greetin'.
And then he took and burnt his will
Such feelings for the hard and worldly phlegm
There was no breeze upon the bay,
Therefore, 'tis with full happiness that I
By this time he was cross the foord,
The taller grasses and full-flowering weed,
And many a poet echoes the conceit,
Till he had peopled them with beings bright
I feel that joy was dwelling there,
An' 'twere na the cost o' the rape.
How calm! how still! the only sound,
And stops the plough, and hides the field in snows;
To catch the tunings of a voice divine.
The sun has burnt her coal-black hair,
First enter'd A, a grave, broad, solemn wight,
And often, ere the race was done,
His little hands, when flowers were seen,
Amid the fierce intoxicating tones
The deep-dyed Brenta,  where their hues instil
O for ten years, that I may overwhelm
And on the other side, outspread, is seen
Stol'n to this paradise, and so entranced,
As was thy cradle; hither shalt thou flee
How poor their forms appear! how languid, wan, and weak!
The nymph arose: he left them to their joy,
Wants no whip to drive him now;
Not a' the quacks, wi' a' their gumption,
The sound of merriment and chorus bland:
Her native grace so void of art,
Tho' fickle fortune has deceiv'd me,
To catch a glimpse of Fawns, and Dryades
Uttering the while some mumblings funeral.
Till in the bosom of a leafy world
More happy love! more happy, happy love!
Fear not clouds will always lower.
And to god Phœbus, for a golden lyre;
She once believed them, but had doubts since then.
Through aged boughs, that yielded like the mist
Thick rolls the mist, that smokes and falls in dew;
I asked no more but a sodger laddie.
The earth its dower of river, wood, and vale,
One summer-day I chanced to see
And all were grieved poor Goody's end to see:
No need to tell thee of them, for I see
The hull drives on, though mast and sail be torn;
To see and to behold these horrors new?
Wings to find out an immortality.
And scraps of joy my wandering ever finds
Twirling them by the window pane
Her nose and chin they threaten ither--
May claw his lug, and straik his beard,
I have no dædale heart: why is it wrung
And there was muckle fun an' jokin',
There's somebody weary wi' lying her lane;
On some bright essence could I lean, and lull
It may not be: nor ev'n can Fancy's eye
But tho' dull prose-folk Latin splatter
And almost trampled on her nest.
But still within my bosom's core
And now the numerous tramplings quiver lightly
"I swear," said Hermes, "by my serpent rod,
So whip! at the summons, old Satan came flying;
Chacing away all worldliness and folly;
Her lips are like yon cherries ripe,
Filling with harmony the ear and eye;
But me he shall not buy nor fee,
Thou shouldst be one of all. Ah, bitter strife!
How beautiful, if sorrow had not made
From luxury's contagion, weak and vile!
The grass is buzzing round like bees;
Creüs was one; his ponderous iron mace
O'er erring deeds and thoughts, a heavenly hue
But never ranging, still unchanging,
That yet half shows his face, and half enshrouds,
To unperplex'd delight and pleasure known.
The iron hand that breaks our band,
And there stood the cobbler as dry as a bun,
Rough billows were my home by night and day,--
My dear, dear Sister! And this prayer I make,
Unto his horse, that's feeding free,
His plump white arms, and shoulders, enough white
But I beheld its birth upon the brine:
Aught to displace Athenæ's poor remains:
Which the great lord inhabits not: and so
Anon he stain'd the thick and spongy sod
Whose travelled phantasy from the far Nile's
With life, as our freed souls rejoin the Universe.
I wish nothing else but to please,
As if there were no Man to trouble what is clear.
Peace to Torquato's injured shade! 'twas his
Therefore the operations of the dawn
She foundered on a rock, while we clambered up the shrouds,
Then in a sort of triumph sings
The laddies by the banks o' Nith,
Look up, and tell me if this feeble shape
Perished, perchance, in some domestic feud,
Whene'er my Muse does on me glance,
"Now, little Edward, say why so;
He bleez'd owre her, an' she owre him,
Be to the poor like onie whunstane,
Or in a narrower sphere wild Rapine's path pursued.
Lift up your heads, sweet Spirits, heavily,
Like vestal primroses, but dark velvet
To charm the surly house-dog's faithful bark.
He lets them loose, they triumph at his will:
What former time, nor skill, nor thought could plan:
"An honest wabster to his trade,
The social hours, swift-wing'd, unnotic'd, fleet;
This once as happy heart of mine,
In spite o' crowds, in spite o' mobs,
Until it seemed to bring a joy to my despair.
Ill har'sts, daft bargains, cutty-stools,
Into hoarse fury, till the shower set free
Yet where there's mischief he can find a way
And the trim walks are broken up, and grass,
Here awa, there awa, haud awa hame;
Must do the thing, or both will be destroy'd._"--
Or they are but the ghosts, the dying swells
But fairer never touch'd a heart
"Whose aught thae chiels maks a' this bustle here!"
Had at the time some dainty fair one,
To mak' himsel' look fair and fatter,
Thou lingering star, with less'ning ray,
But Quiet to quick bosoms is a Hell,
Where the wa'-flower scents the dewy air,
Millions of tongues record thee, and anew
And bloodless, with its sleepless sorrow aches,
All fallen and lost by the Ottoman's sword.
A cloth of woven crimson, gold, and jet:--
And plain enough indeed it was to find
Then there were fauns and satyrs taking aim
Make them indeed immortal, and impart
That royal porch, that high-built fair demesne;
My parents' bones are in their dusty urns
For I have none on earth as yet
A loving-kindness for the great man's fame,
Cow-tending boy, to toil unreconciled,
The stars above the glassy lake,
Soon must I view thee as a pleasant dream
And the heart beating love as I'm clasp'd in her arms,
An universal Deluge, which appears
Our friends, the reviewers, those chippers and hewers,
She soon shall see her tender brood,
Till, slowly mounting oer the ridge of clouds
Peona kiss'd, and bless'd with fair good night:
For the whole herd, as by a whirlwind writhen,
Your factors, grieves, trustees, and bailies,
These fardels  of the heart--the heart whose sweat was gore.
Her wild and timid nature to his aim:
Pull'd down fresh foliage and coverture
Which tumbles mightiest sovereigns,  and hath flung
No better neighbour entered house than she,
There anguish does not sting; nor pleasure pall:
B' the L--d! ye'se get them a'thegither.
My gallant braw John Highlandman.
And curse the ruffian's aim, and mourn thy hapless fate.
Where many a Patriot-name on high
Through cloudless blue, and round each silver throne.
Cut by an Indian for its juicy balm.
For some celestial fruit forbidden to our wants.
Thy fair finger showed me the place where they trod,
And freedom's birthright from the weak devour.
Deaf to his throbbing throat's long, long melodious moan.
Whar damned devils roar and yell,
And I'll een snatch a minute's breath or two,
And divine liquids come with odorous ooze
And lo! from opening clouds, I saw emerge
I love not Man the less, but Nature more,
"All cates and dainties shall be stored there
For we have many a mountain-path to tread,
'Till daft mankind aft dance a reel
If I were not thus taught, should I the more
Or dealing thro' amang the naigs
When Nature her great master-piece designed,
"I saw thy pulse's maddening play,
My humble knapsack a' my wealth,
And I couldn't forget him for hours.
Thou owned a language by which hearts are stirred
Come let us spend the lightsome days
Into the bosom of a hated thing.
Thine olive ripe as when Minerva  smiled,
My droukit sark-sleeve, as ye ken;
We'll stand beneath the willow tree.
Looks oer the gate; the thresher's lumping flail
"I was a woman, let me have once more
Roaming the illimitable waters round;
His face was gloom, his heart was sorrow,
Where is the peace that awaited my wand'ring,
Richly caparisoned, a ready row
"Come hither, hither, my little page
And acts the harlequin, to show
King to himself and fool to all beside.
Starts at the sight of Laura; nor can wean
This wand against yon lyre on the pedestal."
Pity's petition for the fox and hare,
That 'yont the hallan snugly chows her cood:
Hark! heard you not the forest-monarch's roar?
Thy waves would vainly roll, all sweeping as they seem.
And my strength for your strength and bar your renown
Misshapes the beauteous forms of things;
All unrevealed even to the powers
These children of the sun which summer brings
But I call'd her quickly back again
Yet humbly kind in time o' need,
A native of the land where I respire
In magical powers to bless, and to sooth.
Distracted with the richest overflow
The meadows runnels, runnels pebble-stones,
Like hoarse night-gusts sepulchral briars among.
Pursue what Chance or Fate proclaimeth best;
The black and yellow bumble first on wing
O Lord my God, that glib-tongu'd Aiken,
When once the sun sinks in the west,
And like stock-fish come o'er his studdie
My heart is rejoic'd at my sodger laddie.
O'er vales that teem with fruits, romantic hills,
Ye powers of honour, love, and truth,
The gay gaudy glare of vanity and art:
Ye'se a' be het ere I come back.
'Mid many things unsightly to strange ee;
Into o'er-hanging boughs, and precious fruits.
Europe and Afric on each other gaze!
Just as two noble steeds, and palfreys twain,
Devices quaint, and Frolics ever new,
Till morn's long streaking shadows lose their tails,
Methinks he cometh late and tarries long.
Blew up each Tory's dark designs,
I did not speak--I saw her face,
And drop like hours into eternity.
So witless of their doom, that verily
And mossy network too is there,
Dire was the hate at old Harlaw,
Let me not see the patriot's high bequest,
Let's look about, and find a sheltering place.
Perhaps ye are too happy to be glad:
She dwells with Beauty--Beauty that must die;
But now they'll busk her like a fright,
Appear'dst thou not to Paris in this guise?
Her parentage humble as humble can be;
Of recollection! make my watchful care
And one as all a ghastly gap did make
As my auld pen's worn to the grissle;
If in the dangerous game they shine to-day,
Lycius shrank closer, as they met and past,
It cannot be that ought will work him harm."
And Peace? where can its happiness abound?--
Turns back and leaves her dwelling free.
And laugh till they're weary to see't,
Upon a tyrant's head. Ah! had I never seen,
And feels its life in every limb,
Full many the glories that brighten thy youth,
O love! how potent hast thou been to teach
O, happy day! rejoice, rejoice!
Strenuous with hellish tyranny. Attend!
He fir'd a fiddler in the north
Where didst thou melt too? By thee will I sit
And cast into that hole. My husband's father
The springing lilies sweetly prest,
Full of meek sympathy must heave their sighs
Who spite of all the dreadful fears they made
With many a sweet and solemn requiem breathed
Which warns me, with its stillness, to forsake
His mind as barren and his heart as hard,
Will often live in one small cottage,
But deep this truth impressed my mind--
Wi' sheep o' credit like thysel!
Turning into sweet milk the sophist's spleen.
A melancholy Bird? O idle thought!
The cellar was empty, each barrel was drained
Bold Richardton's  heroic swell;
Will rise with other years, till Man shall learn
'Till our gude-man has gotten the scorn;
And (what's aft mair than a' the lave)
And thus they plod in sluggish misery,
No more of your guests, be they titled or not,
And lately had he learned with truth to deem
Up! up! my friend, and clear your looks,
Till then he hoped his bones might there be laid,
To hover round my head, and make me sick
Could charm them into such an attitude.
Her favour Duncan could na win;
Justly, that highest badge to wear!
And thou shalt see thy sweet nymph even now."
As witchcraft gleaned from old blackletter books.
A chief ever glorious like Ali Pashaw.
A power more strong in beauty, born of us
O saw ye my dearie, my Eppie M'Nab?
The boy, that scareth from the spiry wheat
Alone? No, no; and by the Orphean lute,
A funeral dower of present woes and past--
Who should be Faculty's Dean, Sir.--
His very goddess: good-bye earth, and sea,
"If he is hurt in life or limb"--
Lay by him, and a shatter'd rib of rock
For those who their mortality  have felt,
Some kindle, couthie, side by side,
We'll hide the cooper behind the door,
The little babe was buried there,
Life's poor day I'll musing rave,
Like some brown clod the harrows failed to break.
Of their heroic dwellers: dost thou flow,
Will wistful linger on that hallowed spot;
Sinks, like a sea-weed, unto whence she rose!
Yet could I seat me by this ivied stone
And laid those proud roofs bare to Summer's rain--
Throbb'd with the syllables.--"Mnemosyne!
Be roses fine as eer they will,
Of a light mantle; and while Clerimond
Maid of Jerusalem, by the Dead Sea,
The auld guidwife's weel hoordet nits
To hunt, or to pasture, or do what she would:
Of whitest Cassia, fresh from summer showers:
Where leans the mossy willow half way oer,
If e'er ye want, or meet wi' scant,
Unsepulchred they roamed, and shrieked each
Revers'd that spear, redoubtable in war,
Me even to tears: thence, when a little eas'd,
When Winter muffles up his cloak,
Friend o' my muse, friend o' my life,
Oh me! ten thousand times I'd rather
In leafy quiet; where to pry, aloof,
The cruel lady, without any show
And ye may rowe me in your plaid,
And pray persuade with thee--Ah, I have done,
Thy lily neck, rose cheek, and all.
Now fareth he, that o'er the vast beneath
See it half finished: but let Autumn bold,
To mark these shadowings, and stand in awe.
They had been fou' for weeks thegither!
Resides a sweet lassie, my thought and my dream.
Had been my dreary death? Fool! I began
With white and red bedight for holiday,
Minions of Splendour shrinking from distress!
And by the church, and o'er the down,
Cried, Hughie Graham, thou art a loun.
Where twa wheel-barrows tremble when they meet--
In midst of all, the venerable priest
Veil'd, in a chariot, heralded along
But slave succeed to slave through years of endless toil.
He tries to reach the woods, an awkward race,
He did; not with cold wonder fearingly,
I read these words, and read again, and tried
"Our bodies feel, where'er they be,
Sounds "God is mightiest over all";
Before thee thy own vanquished Lord of War?
The new discovered things to see--
And Susie, whose daddy was laird o' the ha';
Hence shalt thou quickly to the watery vast;
Prohibits to dull life in this our state
Nought but griefs with me remain.
I found that old Solomon proved it fair,
And when the howling wintry blast
But left a thought, a buzzing in his head.
With the fierce native daring which instils
The morning that must wed them both;
The first-born of all shap'd and palpable Gods,
Laden with years and meikle pain,
These toying hands and kiss their smooth excess?
Or plaintive Martyrs, worthy of the name;
Where, haply, pity strays forlorn,
With joy unfeign'd, brothers and sisters meet,
Chaos of ruins! who shall trace the void,
Come forth, and bring with you a heart
Led him a sair _faux pas_, man;
They a' maun meet some ither place,
But the bonniest flower on the banks of the Devon
To thee this votive offering I impart,
Or that pleasures like a flock of birds would ever take to wing,
Round every spot were trod Apollo's foot;
That seems to feel itself from home,
Are all and each affection's friend
O think how I should love a bed of flowers!--
Hasting to join the sweeping Nith,
Has moments like their brightest; but the weight
Till parch-lipped summer pines in drought away,
But soon the thistle wounding sore
And bonnie she, and ah, how dear!
As if the clouds its echo would repeat;
Slowly and smoothly went the ship
As blythe and as artless as the lamb on the lea,
At sight of such a dismal labouring,
The cruel Fates between us throw
Shall I unmoved behold the hallowed scene,
Syne bad him slip frae 'mang the folk,
O such deformities! Old Charon's self,
She left her fire, or left her bed,
A single star is at her side, and reigns
Aye, peace on thorns, in faith forgiven,
Fir'd at the simple, artless lays
My stem was fair, my bud was green,
My talents they were not the worst,
Now that our morning meal is done,
I'll no say men are villains a';
And mingle sighs with mine, love
Right up above the mast did stand,
Whistling his roaring pack abroad
Spontaneous wisdom breathed by health,
Protect and guard the mother-plant,
For sad was the parting thou makes me remember,
Of his land's tongue, which he would oft forsake
I sighed, the moon it shone so clear;
Though change till now did never injure thee;
That make the miser's treasure poor:
And always, at the rising of the sun,
Produce more than our searching witnesseth:
How quiet death is. Where soil is men grow,
He gaped for't, he grap'd for't,
But the soft shadow of my thrice-seen love,
And to this arbitrary queen of sense
The thyrsus, that his watching eyes may swim
Yestreen, when to the trembling string
"With his cruel bow he lay'd full low
In crowded tumults heard and hurled.
And in its tenderer hour on that his bosom dwelt.
To entice her to a dive! then stealing in
And yet so nursed and bigoted to strife,
In careless attitude, and there reflect
Which they must both for ever rue.
Softly they blew aside the taper's flame;
The followers o' the ragged Nine,
Far, far frae me and Logan braes!
The wild world is all before us--
And soon his eyes had drunk her beauty up,
Pale limbs at bottom of a crystal well;
Amid the pages, and the torches' glare,
O let him feel the evil he hath done;
And Slaughter heaped on high his weltering ranks:
And the rocks melt wi' the sun:
They stept into the boat, and launch'd from land.
Kissing dead things to life. The sleeping kine,
Wakens with sudden start and tosses off
I send you here a faithfu' list,
Than shoots the slanted hail-storm, down he dropt
The Skiff-boat ne'rd: I heard them talk,
Sae gently bent its thorny stalk,
But now he half-raises his deep-sunken eye,
Have passed to darkness with the vanished age.
Nae howdie gets a social night,
Though high _above_ the Sun of Glory glow,
Red Battle stamps his foot, and Nations feel the shock.
That Meg should be a bride the morn,
And eels weel ken'd for souple tail,
For love is life, is heaven, and all
That I for gear and grace may shine,
But gin ye be a brig as auld as me,
That bless the little lintwhite's nest;
But, how it comes, I never kenn'd yet,
Or kirk deserted by its riggin,
Yet, can I not to starry eminence
That thou art nothing, save the jest of Fame,
Will storm his heart, Love's fev'rous citadel:
Or how the royal bard did groaning lie
No terrors hast thou to the brave!
She had a woman's mouth with all its pearls complete:
Of weary days, made deeper exquisite,
Stand i' the stool when I hae done,
On young guidmen, fond, keen, an' crouse;
From een a giant's sinewy strength,
The Goth, the Christian--Time--War--Flood, and Fire,
Moved on with pointed finger. In this guise
I will entice this crystal rill to trace
Like natural sculpture in cathedral cavern;
They downa bide the stink o' powther;
One obscure hiding-place, one little spot
What ance he says, he winna break it;
O raging fortune's withering blast
Your wily snares an' fechtin fierce,
What hadst thou done to sink so peacefully to rest?
Yon distant isle will often hail:
The fretted splendour of each nook and niche.
Old favourite tree, thou'st seen time's changes lower,
As o'er thy plain the Pilgrim pricked his steed,
For she was always fond and full of chat,
That dreary hour he mounts his beast in;
And dear to my heart as the light to my e'e.
Shines through the leafless shrubs all brown and grey,
Remote from man, and storms of mortal care,
And start a cold sweat on my brow,
With well-scoured buckets on proceeds the maid,
The tulzie's sair 'tween Pitt and Fox,
Away from me again, as though her course
And there they stand, as stands a lofty mind,
And reared him at the then Lord Velez' cost.
Th' envenom'd wasp, victorious, guards his cell;
So, with unusual gladness, on he hies
(Auld Ayr, wham ne'er a town surpasses,
That follow'd thine, and thy dear shepherd's kisses:
The bird that charm'd his summer-day,
When, pop! she starts before their nose;
I will take my chance with you;
And soon upon the lake he skims along,
It had not created a warmer emotion
By Girvan's fairy-haunted stream,
With cypress, on a day of sacrifice.
Just now I've ta'en the fit o' rhyme,
Save that a forked cloud or two
Unweave a rainbow, as it erewhile made
And here's to them that wish us weel,
Her form seems floating palpable, and near;
Ah! better had it been for ever so,
Nought heeding who might frown or smile.
When first amang the yellow corn
Where industry still urges labour's speed,
And all was stainless, and on thy clear stream
Now they're crouse and canty baith,
And this I know, full many a time,
Here's crying out for bakes and gills,
Languor there was in it, and tremulous shake,
Or in the streets and walks where proud men are,
Honeyless days and days did he let pass;
Couches of rugged stone, and slaty ridge
Ye did present your smoutie phiz
Thro' life I'm doom'd to wander, O,
And frantic gape of lonely Niobe,
The fallow fields glitter like water indeed,
Fill my sailor's welcome sails,
Nor marks he once a blossom on his way;
Or fence of art, like China's vasty wall?--
But oft' Despondence! miserable bane!
And thus he snorts and jostles to the town.
And he that unawares had there ygazed
If the virtues were pack'd in a parcel,
Too palpable before me--the sad look
Some ill-brewn drink had hov'd her wame;
Cool parsley, basil sweet, and sunny thyme;
The landscape with the quiet of the sky.
The bravest heart on English ground
I could na get sleeping till dawin for greetin',
Wi' weans I'm mair than weel contented,
Here prison injures health and me:
An' she has twa sparkling roguish een.
O let it blush so ever! let it soothe
And, when upheld, the wine from each bright jar
Of witch, and demon, and large coffin-worm,
Fortress of falling Empire! honoured sleeps
A poor, weak, palsy-stricken, churchyard thing,
Had found white coursers prancing in the glen:
But thoughtless follies laid him low,
I fought at land, I fought at sea;
They, like a spell, set every rapture free
Making directly for the woodland altar.
From thy bright eyes unusual brightness shed--
Fame, honest fame, his great, his dear reward!
Of all the shades that slanted o'er the green.
And every night in dreams they groan'd aloud,
New singing for our maids shalt thou devise,
Of olive-green and scarlet bright,
While at the stook the shearers cow'r
Keep mind that ye maun drink the yill.
To hear her gibberish tale so quaintly spoke,
Auld Vandal, ye but show your little mense,
O may these joys be ripe before I die.
A yielding up, a cradling on her care.
Creature, tho' oft the prey of care and sorrow,
And Freedom find no Champion and no Child
For what poor mortals fragment up, as mere
He marches thro' amang the stacks,
And in the savage overwhelming lost,
And she would not conceive it. Timid thing!
By reason of his fallen divinity
The Marineres all return'd to work
To build for Giants, and for his vain earth,
His own hand planted when an idle boy,
How often didst thou pledge and vow
The bard his glory neer receives
That some kind husband had addrest
Commingling slowly with heroic earth,
The happiest thing in all the land
In air he sees white coursers paw, and prance,
And browsed on the bottle of flags lying there,
A towzie tyke, black, grim, and large,
Alas! our young affections run to waste,
They led on first, bent to her meek surprise,
The sun a backward course shall take,
Her mind is nobler sure, her charms perchance as great.
The south nor the east gie ease to my breast,
Upon that very hour, our parentage,
Oh! then for the poor idiot boy!
In magical powers, to bless and to sooth.
But fierce Enceladus sent forth his eyes
O wae on the siller, it is sae prevailing;
I sat a weeping: in the whole world wide
Or to some well-known measure featly move,
When I think on thy noble countenance:
Muse of my native land! loftiest Muse!
Fate oft tears the bosom chords
Altho' his daddie was nae laird,
I doubt na, lass, that weel kenn'd name
That love belongs to sin and death.
Cry the book is with heresy cramm'd;
Whole hours, my idle arms in moping sorrow knit.
The frost of hermit age might warm;
And sky-engendered, Son of Mysteries
To yon old Bald-pate smooths his wrinkled brow,
Had made up that strange thing, an infant's dream)
There, distant shone Art's lofty boast,
But hamely, tawie, quiet an' cannie,
The bag-pipe dinning on the midnight moor
'Mid circling horrors sinks at last
As hang on brambles. Well, he brought him home,
Her heav'nly relations there fixed her reign,
Budded, and swell'd, and, full-blown, shed full showers
And say thoul't be my dearie, O?
The present happiness and promised joy
My ball room the pasture, my music the bees,
A pillar'd porch, with lofty portal door,
Then come, my sister! come, I pray,
Proclaims that Thomson was her son.
Though I had ne'er a farthing, O;
Yet runs, himself, life's mad career,
Curves hugely: now, far in the deep abyss,
But though I'll gladly trace these scenes with thee,
O bitter blaws the e'enin' blast
The old yoe calls her lamb nor cares to stoop
A maid of early morning twirled her mop upon the moor;
Thou never braindg't, an' fetch't, an' fliskit,
Ye would not call this too indulged tongue
The boy goes hasty for his load of brakes,
The poor, oppressed, honest man
Rich benedictions o'er us; ye have wreathed
Hath made thee a disciple unto time.
With form our fancy, gaining as we give
Has dived to its foundations, gulph'd it down,
"Ha! ha!" said she, "I knew not this hard life,
And ony deil that thinks to get you,
At war, at peace, or inter-quarreling
Till slave and despot be but things which were.
Winds breathe from God's abode "we come,"
Yon sunny Sea heaves brightly, and remains
And gathering swallows twitter in the skies.
And always labours longer than the rest.
Beneath dark palm trees by a river side?
Where he had plunged it. Glory without end
Her eyes in torture fix'd, and anguish drear,
There was once a day--but old Time then was young--
Auld Goody Blake was old and poor,
May never pity soothe thee with a sigh,
Which all admire, but many dread to view:
I tried in fear the pinions of my will.
Woe-hurricanes beat ever at the gate,
Who owns a Bushby's heart without the head;
When banes are craz'd, and bluid is thin,
Great bounty from Endymion our lord.
Lassie wi' the lint-white locks,
It is a father's tale. But if that Heaven
Of men and empires,--'tis to be forgiven,
And bade the sun farewell, and joy'd his fill.
For to thy tongue will I all health confide.
"Why look'st thou so?"--with my cross bow
Then, as rocked, I sink to sleep,
At length his lonely cot appears in view,
Where the daisies are rose-scented,
Not broken inharmoniously, as now
As bees flee hame wi' lades o' treasure,
In sacred strains and tuneful numbers join'd,
And pinch the snuff-box empty by degrees,
Atween the pillars of the sylvan roof,
The tempest's howl, it soothes my soul,
Prepared for Dobbin, whom he means to ride;
The bodies had advanc'd, and now
Turn them aside, wretch! or the righteous ban
O Saturn! come away, and give them heart;
Ambition is no sluggard: 'tis no prize,
Grow up to blossom where they can.
To feast on what the cotter leaves,--
Her lucid bow, continuing thus: "Drear, drear
The archers too, upon a wider plain,
Though Betty's in a mighty flurry,
Wha us'd at trysts and fairs to driddle,
Wi' her, the lassie dear to me,
Where are thy men of might? thy grand in soul?
To see high, golden corn wave in the light
Took silently their foot-prints.
In barn uplighted, and companions boon
Hearts leal, an' warm, an' kin';
To Endymion's amaze: "By Cupid's dove,
But ah! I am no knight whose foeman dies;
As every man who knew her says,
I see thee gracefu', straight, and tall,
Let it content thee, Sister, seeing me
If I have wander'd in those paths
My muse may imp her wing for some sublimer flight.
The smiling Spring comes in rejoicing,
Among th' illustrious Scottish sons
Or when they struck old Scotia's melting airs,
Through primrose-tufts, in that sweet bower,
The modern farmer waxes wondrous wise;
Hark to the melody of distant bells
Then thro' the dews he maun repair--
And try in vain to seek repose:
She took me like a child of suckling time,
Wi' kindly bleat, when she did spy him,
Robbing the spring of all its flowers,
A house o' great merit and note,
Than with a frightful scream she vanished:
And thought his very een enrich'd;
Of your departing voices, is the knoll
And rascals whyles that do him wrang,
E'er deigned to bend her chastely-awful eyes:
Seem'd taking flight for heaven, without a death,
Through tendril wreaths fantastically creeping.
Away from me again, indeed, indeed--
And poet pastoral, lover of the shade,
By giving for her honey melody.
The smoothness and the sheen of Beauty's cheek,
And be ye mindful that Hyperion,
And bless the parent's evening ray
The earth clos'd--gave a solitary moan--
Myself to things of light from infancy;
And wonders what the red blotched eggs can be:
He meditated, plotted, and even now
I must be thy sad servant evermore:
Say, you'll be merry, tho' you can't be rich.
Where will the splendor be content to reach?
How in an hour the Power which gave annuls
Who on wide plains gather in panting troops,
Idlesse it seem, hath its morality--
That blasphemed the bright Lyrist to his face,
Admires the spot and loves it well,
And I follow the Collier Laddie.
But mingled up; a gleaming melancholy;
Weak, timid landsmen on life's stormy main!
Are worse than poison'd darts of steel;
Thy voice was at sweet tremble in mine ear,
The hour and the moment o' time!
His limbs are loos'd, and eager, on he hies
At which fair Madeline began to weep,
You hardly can perceive his joy.
I'll kilt my coats aboon my knee,
And so it chanc'd, for many a door was wide,
Tho' now thou's dowie, stiff, an' crazy,
I never loot on that I kenn'd it, or car'd,
Until their tongues were loos'd in poesy.
Beneath the shade of stately banneral,
Cool grass, nor tasted the fresh slumberous air;
Till on some jocund morn--lo, Land! and All is well!
Jet-black and bare, save where with rust
Where Venice sate in state, throned on her hundred isles!
He blows a bugle,--an ethereal band
O shell-borne Neptune, I am pierc'd and stung
And the sweet voice of pity ne'er sounds in my ear.
With uplift hands I blest the stars of heaven.
Go glad and smilingly, athwart the gloom;
Too glorious, were this all his mighty arm had done.
As breezes rise and fall and billows swell,
I have not loved the World, nor the World me,--
Swearing by all her lucky powers of fate,
From him, whose promise was to every one,
Had hol'd his heartie like a riddle,
Has died into an echo; it is fit
Where dead leaves rustle sweet and give alarm
Of fruits, and flowers, and bunches of knot-grass,
The mirth and music of a woman's voice,
And boil in endless torture; while the sweat
His wee bit ingle, blinkin' bonnily.
For an auld man shall never daunton me.
From such high soaring by a downward glance:
To feel the beauty of a silent eve,
Yet must I dote upon thee,--call thee sweet.
Thou sacerdotal gain, but general loss!
To muse for ever--Then a lucid wave,
So may he guard the sister and the wife,
Whose mellow reeds are touch'd with sounds forlorn
Then thread the sunny valley laced with streams,
A "hair-brain'd, sentimental trace"
The lion and the bull thy care have found,
The joy can scarcely reach the heart.
Pride may oerstride thy wealth,
The wooing arms which held me, and did give
As, both to leave, afraid to stay,
Than Chaos and blank Darkness, though once chiefs;
The young dogs, swinge them to the labour;
I'll give you the best help I can:
And wanders here to wail and weep!
Few--none--find what they love or could have loved,
And follow my love thro' the water.
The key turns, and the door upon its hinges groans.
Smiled at each other. Happy he who trusts
Full in the centre stands the Bull at bay,
Showering those powerful fragments on the dead.
A circle there of merry listeners stand
Whose rage planned hosts of murders at a breath--
Alike beheld beneath pale Hecate's blaze:
I bow'd fu' low unto this maid,
It pat me fidgin-fain to hear't,
Of any mason reptile, bird or beast;
When the bonnie lad that I lo'e best
To a safe level matting. Now prepare,
From Tweed to the Orcades was her domain,
But thy auld tail thou wad hae whiskit,
Upholding wreaths of ivy; the white dove,
It's just a carnal inclination.
O what can stay my lovely maid?
Above a cloud, and with a gradual swim
And hing our fiddles up to sleep,
Tumultuous,--and, in chords that tenderest be,
Pearled with the self-same shower.
Anbank, wha guess'd the ladies' taste,
Those days are gone--but Beauty still is here.
'Neath smothering parsley, and a hazy light
Foliage which once hung oer the waters blue.
Strong on the sign-post stands the stupid ox.
Thy factions, in their worse than civil war,
For Britain's guid! guid faith, I doubt it!
I've scarce heard aught describ'd sae weel,
(A world 'gainst peace in constant arms)
It could not be so phantasied. Fierce, wan,
The life we image, even as I do now--
I'd feast on beauty a' the night;
A partner in your sorrow's mysteries;
Of that perpetual weight which on her spirit lay.
Hang where the wild duck hurried past and fled.
The luntin pipe, an sneeshin mill,
the day and date as under noted;
Because the deadly days which we have seen,
But hear their absent thoughts o' ither,
The warly race may riches chase,
Dark Sappho! could not Verse immortal save
But worse than steel, and flame, and ages slow,
And _all_ must shield their _all_, or share Subjection's woes.
The Pow'r, incens'd, the pageant will desert,
And have no friend, save these alone,
The Battle-field, where Persia's victim horde
So ran the far-fam'd Roman way,
Who, us the boughs all temptingly project,
To meet his rosy child, with feathery sails,
And Jerry the clown, and no other,
The cataract, whirling down the precipice,
For Hannibal's just at your gates,
Who to the awe-struck world unlocked Elysium's gates.
But let that pass--I sleep--but Thou shalt yet awake.
An' when they meet wi' sair disasters,
Retreats to Dryburgh's cooling shade,
Where mowers cut the pleasant swath
Are handed round wi' right guid will;
Torn from the womb of mountains by the throes
An' damn'd excisemen in a bussle,
I'll want him, ere I take such a damnable load!"
Tells that the foe was Andalusia's guest:
Their left-hand general had nae skill,
Of living water from the centre rose,
Ye'll catechize him every quirk,
Soul of my thought! with whom I traverse earth,
"God! who art never out of hearing,
Her mourn when beetles have been trampled on:
Their timid necks and tremble; so these both
And even silence found a tongue,
That I might drink, and leave the world unseen,
That blooms sae far frae haunt o' man,
Yells the mad crowd o'er entrails freshly torn,
To my down-sunken hours, and with thee,
Long may thy hardy sons of rustic toil
Relic of nobler days, and noblest arts!
The comfortable green and juicy hay
Heav'n's beauties on my fancy shine;
His wanderings done--his visions ebbing fast,
A path, old tree, goes by thee crooking on,
But how the subject-theme may gang,
To mark the mutual kindling eye.
And bounces up and flies at passer-bye.
Which when he heard, that minute did he bless,
He's peevish and jealous of a' the young fellows:
Calm speculation; but if you are wise,
Yet listen, ye who will, whilst I bring proof
Hale as the morn and happy as her song.
Our enemy's--but let not that forbid
He bears the unbroken blast from every side.
(Alas, for fourpence how my die is cast!)
Go, teach them to tremble, fell tyrant! but know,
And aye we'll taste the barley bree.
Some unco blate, an' some wi' gabs,
He'll stamp an' threaten, curse an' swear,
That only Heaven to which Earth's children may aspire.
Ne'er yet for one thine arrows flew so fast,
Some fearful end must be: where, where is it?
Nae mair at present can I measure,
Though I have found, I will not rob thy nest
Grieves me to cut it up; indeed
In cool mid-forest. Surely I have traced
A sight, pale envy to convulse,)
And hark! how blithe the throstle sings!
And roar every note o' the damn'd.
Regardless of the tears and unavailing prayers!
Do gently murder half my soul, and I
Youth, grace, and love attendant move,
Was quite forgotten, save of us alone!
No; every muse shall join her tuneful tongue,
And faint away, before my eager view:
Between her luscious lips and eyelids thin.
"How many are you then," said I,
Ill satisfied keen nature's clamorous call,
Of sackcloth was thy wedding garment made;
"When yellow waves the heavy grain,
Men may be foes but beauty makes us friends.
A lovin' father I'll be to thee,
A thought is come into her head;
The diamond dew is her een sae blue,
Great wits in Spanish, Tuscan, and Malay.
But, by your leaves, my learned foes,
At this, from every side they hurried in,
Ne'er break your heart for ae rebute,
It shades his chimney while the singing wind
Down the crooked boundings of the pasture-side.
With outspread wings the Naiad Zephyr courts,
Three kings both great and high;
"Why did I dream that sleep o'er-power'd me
Where I may all my many senses please,
To twinkle on my bosom? No one dies
Land of Albania! let me bend mine eyes
I gie their wames a random pouse,
Well I know how things will be,
But now 'tis despis'd and neglected.
Before the approaching fellers:
From whom Submission wrings an infamous repose.
A man of elegance, and stature tall:
In which the affections gently lead us on,
Thou art the man!" Endymion started back
And gie their hides a noble curry,
And constant as her vespers would he watch,
If that he want the yellow dirt,
And droning dragon-fly, on rude bassoon,
The clock is on the stroke of one;
Here impious men have punished been, and lo!
All radiant from his triumph in the fight;
And Cintra's mountain  greets them on their way,
Joyous all follow'd, as the leader call'd,
Is of all these the gentlier-mightiest.
I there wi' something did forgather,
For the far footsteps of thy mortal lover;
The stars shot down wi' sklentin light,
Of gladness in the air--while many, who
Nor leaves his dry house though we come so near.
He ventures in: let no buzz'd whisper tell:
And dew-drops pearl the evening's breast;
An' there's a batch o' wabster lads,
How can ye bloom sae fresh and fair;
She says she lo'es me best of a'.
Broad leaved fig trees even now foredoom
The yellowhammer never makes a noise
His little, nameless, unremembered acts
Ye little ken what cursed speed
Snatch from the orchard hedge the mizzled clothes
And drives the rebels to their very door.
For them and for their little ones provide;
Craigdarroch  led a light-arm'd corps,
If free to choose, I cannot now restore
Amid her window-flowers,--sighing,--weaning
No higher bard than simple maidenhood,
"Gie him strong drink, until he wink,
There livest blissfully. Ah, if to thee
O feel as if it were a common day;
I hae been blithe wi' comrades dear;
I see her yet, the sonsie quean,
Although their face he ne'er had kend it,
But sweeter flows the Nith, to me,
If I may dare a lifted eye to Thee,
With thy good help, this very night shall see
"Fool!" said the sophist, in an under-tone
In meditation dwelt--with learning wrought,
But what your lordship likes to gie them?
Of busy cities, now in vain displayed,
Again I might desert fair virtue's way:
For spot to build and be unseen,
Our hearts deny it: and so young, so fair,
And there I shut her wild, wild eyes
Of easy slopes, and shadowy trees that lean
And torrent, and ten thousand jutting shapes,
And from all hope I was forever hurled.
O haud your tongue now, Luckie Laing,
Uplifting his strong bow into the air,
A set o' dull, conceited hashes,
Why did they not come along with you, Dumourier?
And while his opening mellows oer the scenes
Of elevated thoughts; a sense sublime
Last Christmas when we talked of this,
To thy poor fenceless, naked child--the Bard!
A noise of harmony, pulses and throes
Catching the windings of their wandering song.
O still flow between us, thou wide roaring main;
Vain are his weapons, vainer is his force.
Unseen, unheard, unwatched by any star;
Dear heart, and can it be that such raptures meet decay?
Flung a smile of repose on the holiday plough;
Of all his kingdom. Long in misery
So wives will gie them bits o' bread,
Poor plackless devils like mysel',
Our chearful faith that all which we behold
Like hoary bristles to erect and stare.
He sought them out, he sought them in,
The horse came to look, and seemed happy to stay;
The gay convolvulus, wreathing round the thorn,
I mark'd thy embryo-tuneful flame,
That so much laughter, so much life enjoy'd.
To the small path that towels underneath,
It brak the sweet heart of my faithfu' auld dame--
Fit only for a doited monkish race,
What daughter of her beauties was the heir?
To spread her conquests farther.
To sink thro' slaps, an' reave an' steal
There's not a lad in a' the lan'
We talked of marriage and our marriage day;
Thee thus, and weep for fondness--I am pain'd,
The worst of stumbles ye can fall agen;
Smelt so deliciously, the puzzled bee
To its dregs--and Sir John like a rebel remained
Whose words are images of thoughts refin'd,
As doth the voice of love: there's not a breath
So sad, so melancholy, so bereft!
Above the Dogeless city's vanished sway;
One kiss brings honey-dew from buried days.
Auld baudrans by the ingle sits,
Or, haply, to his ev'ning thought,
Thou pendulum betwixt a smile and tear,
To lie in kilns and barns at e'en
Laugh at their follies--laugh e'en at thyself:
In wild, wood-shady dell to stay for hours.
May a' that's guid watch o'er them,
He recked not of the life he lost nor prize,
When old age shall this generation waste,
He mark'd their brows and foreheads; saw their hair
To follow her; with aged eyes aghast
Freedom as none can taste it, nor dost waste
That unbelief has not a space to breathe.
The Poet's eye can reach those golden halls,
And then the ballad of his sad life closes
And from thee many a parent stem
That's laid in the bed beyond thee!
How blithely wad I bide the stoure,
Lang may your elbuck jink and diddle,
But friends an' folk that wish me well,
When absent from my sailor lad?
Seemed hanging rocks in my esteem;
Falls calm as storms drop on an autumn day,
Whoe'er he be that sojourns here,
And ferlie at the folk in Lon'on.
Or he shall calm his breast, or learn experience sage.
That ask the eye--so here condense thy soul
He knew those children of the Spring:
"Thy vows were on a time to Nais paid:
Tho' in sic phraisin' terms ye've penn'd it,
Check thy climbing step, elate,
And puff from the tail's end to stifled throat:
To taste the gale lest Love should ride the wind,
Should share in nature's immortality,
Ye know on earth, and all ye need to know.
"Within his car, aloft, young Bacchus stood,
But did you see my dearest Chloris
The bauldest o' them a' he cow'd;
As seek the foul Thief onie place,
To knaw the unfinished bone; the placid cow
To meet them were na slaw, man;
He kend the Lord's sheep, ilka tail,
Conqueror and Captive of the Earth art thou!
The dew sat chilly on her breast
Whiles, in the human bosom pryin,
For lack o' thee I scrimp my glass.
Thy country's honour on thy face attends;
Scooped crow-pot-stone, or cockle-shell,
I doubt na! they wad bid nae better
In hopes for which no words are found;
I come to wish you all a good new year!
Know, that the lightning sanctifies below
He threw his hatchet--but the fox was bye.
And like a passing thought, she fled
Are sought in vain, and o'er each mouldering tower,
And O, to be lying beyond thee;
And on Parnassus seen the Eagles fly
Thou goest, thou darling of my heart!
Her doubtful balance ey'd, and sway'd her rod;
The enslavers and the enslaved--their death and birth;
Before each lucid pannel fuming stood
And all his warrior-guests, with shade and form
Aught of Humanity's sweet melting grace?
And loud resounded mirth and dancing.
Who long with wants and woes has striv'n,
To Freedom's cause, in every age and clime;
Must such conviction come upon his head,
He turns about to face the loud uproar
Lang may your elbuck jink and diddle,
The little moss is blossoming still.
The fieldfares chatter in the whistling thorn
"To beings else forlorn and blind!
The right of freedom was to injure thine:
Still more, if that wand'rer were royal.
And what if he must die in sorrow!
Tell thae far warlds, wha lies in clay,
The brave Caledonian views wi' disdain;
Gane is the day, and mirk's the night,
'Mang fields o' flowering clover gay;
Be still a symbol of immensity;
But light leaves, young as joy, stands where it stood,
Only known to wand'ring swains,
Hark, how the nine-tail'd cat she plays!
For without an honest manly heart,
In whose face was no joy, though all the Gods
The breath of Winter comes from far away,
I thought he knew some ill of me
Por'd on its hazle cirque of shedded leaves.
Her voice I hung like fruit among green leaves:
Said I, low voic'd: "Ah, whither! 'Tis the grot
Thou giv'st the word: Thy creature, man,
Though thrown like weeds from gardens nowadays;
He's always compleenin' frae mornin' to e'enin',
The hand of Brutus, that so grandly fell
Was pass'd in dreaming. Hearken, sweet Peona!
To tend the flocks, or till the soil,
But see him on the edge of life,
Because they yet may meet thine eye,
Or, turning to the Vatican, go see
We're safe enough; here in this arm-chair sit,
Wha think that havins, sense, an' grace,
My restless spirit never could endure
And speechify and comment and explain,
Now my hard day's work is done,
And always does my heart with pleasure dance,
And not a man but felt the terror in his hair.
Like melodies upon a sandy plain,
By every honest joy of Love and Life endeared!
Her forehead's like the show'ry bow,
Yet with a nobler aim than in his Youth's fond prime.
I'd gie you sic a hearty doze o't,
Of buried griefs the spirit sees, but scarce
They made our lugs grow eerie, O;
Like a ruin of the past all alone.
So gaily curl the waves before each dashing prow.
To cast my e'en up like a pyet,
I sat contemplating the figures wild
_Faites mes baisemains respectueuse_,
Go to your sculptur'd tombs, ye great,
The cock may craw, the day may daw,
The Laird did address her wi' matter mair moving,
Far kend an' noted is thy name;
Then up she springs as if on wings;
Some carrying dails, some chairs an' stools,
With evening-twilight's summer hues,
Childe Harold sailed, and passed the barren spot,
When birds roost on the mossy tree,
Wi' his fause heart and flatt'ring tongue,
Palm-shaded temples, and high rival fanes,
As Greece can still bestow, though Glory fly her glades.
And teach the pale Franks what it is to be slaves,
O fountain'd hill! Old Homer's Helicon!
But every carle can lord it o'er thy land;
To common lookers on, like one who dream'd
And must none close my dying feet,
Tho', by-the-by, abroad why will you roam?
Here the self-torturing sophist, wild Rousseau,
Health to the sex, ilk guid chiel says,
They are enough; and if thy tale be _true_,
And made their playhouse rings of stick and stone;
His coals, his kain, and a' his stents;
And thanks and praises seemed to run
Are upward turn'd to catch the heavens' dew.
Will gar fame blaw until her trumpet crack,
The hawks of ship-mast forests--the untired
Had fallen out that hour. The wanderer,
--Good gracious me, how merrily they fare:
So tells each poor forsaken toy.
When in Round Oak's narrow lane as the south got black again
Adown some trotting burn's meander,
My sailor's thund'ring at his gun:
Through green leaves lift their walls of gray;
An' (what surpris'd me) modesty,
An' sigh, an' sob, an' greet her lane,
Ev'n to the centre of Illyria's vales,
He saw not fiercer wonders--past the wit
And, dearest gift of heaven below,
Keep His goodness still in view,
There was no recognition in those orbs.
Sweet as a muskrose upon new-made hay;
Loving and hatred, misery and weal,
While he from forth the closet brought a heap
A green-grown pond she just has pass'd,
While from beneath some cumbrous boughs hard by
Of colour'd phantasy; for I fear 'twould trouble
But the body was sae doited and blin',
Hark to his strain! and then survey his cell!
I might as weel hae tried a quarry
Troubled with wilder fancies, than the moon
Of bean blossoms, in heaven freshly shed.
A land that prose did never view it,
His steps are not upon thy paths,--thy fields
Or she will die, old Susan Gale.
And put in flowers, that nature weaves
So shall a better spring less bitter fruit bring forth.
Only I pray, as fairest boon, to die,
To this result: "O dreams of day and night!
Of the bright waters; or as when on high,
The dauntless heart that feared no human pride;
Trowth, Cæsar, whyles they're fash't eneugh
Can they the peace and pleasure feel
"O'er the past too fondly wandering,
Eftsones I heard the dash of oars,
O that my een were flowing burns,
'Tis with the thankful glance of parting praise;
O whistle, and I'll come to you, my lad.
And even the motion of our human blood
On a lone winter evening, when the frost
A land unknown to prose or rhyme;
But if he hae the name o' gear,
The channels where my coolest waters flow
Dies like the Dolphin, whom each pang imbues
"Why do you sigh, fair creature?" whisper'd he:
Lorenzo had ta'en ship for foreign lands,
And cradled me in roses. Thus condemn'd,
Beat hemp for others, riper for the string:
Grieving, if aught inanimate e'er grieves,
All have their fooleries--not alike are thine,
I'll cock my nose aboon them a'--
Friends very dear to him he soon will see;
Time, which hath wronged thee with ten thousand rents
Nor give the coward secret breath.
Many all day in dazzling river stood,
But pious Bob, 'mid learning's store,
Then it is free to him; and from an urn,
Close to her passing, in indifference drear,
And sung sweet ballads now forgot,
To feign the pleasure or conceal the pique:
This is the process of our love and wisdom,
Let witless, trusting woman say
Then with her knife, all sudden, she began
Stands when its wind-worn battlements are gone;
Through all the years of this our life, to lead
And did Sol's business in a crack;
As may have had no trivial influence
If thou didst ever any thing believe,
Therefore, on every morrow, are we wreathing
His cheeks with tears were wet.
Melting on flowers as tears melt from the eye.
Well doth the Spanish hind the difference know
Or love ecstatic wake his seraph song.
Feeling about for its old couch of space
With airs delicious. In the greenest nook
Eschylus' pen Will Shakspeare drives;
When I think of old Sneap Green, Puddock's Nook and Hilly Snow,
The heart asleep without a pain--
And looking to the stars: they had contained
And quickly stoppit Rankine's breath.
Wherever he may sport himself and play.
Too many sighs give we to them in fee,
Gar lasses' hearts gang startin'
When thou art dead, and all thy wretched crew?
'Till clay-cauld death sall blin' my e'e,
He might have died: but now, with cheered feel,
Was once a sweet bud on the braes of the Ayr.
And ushers the long dreary night;
Dogs loud barking drive them in.
Can reason down its agonizing throbs;
There let its trumpet blow, and quickly dress
And couch supine their beauties, lily white;
And will she leave her kind friends all
(And so, poor Wretch! fill'd all things with himself
O let me think it is not quite in vain
While plop the snake coils in the flood
Is the swift opening of their wide portal,
To nests upon the ground, which anything
Swift be their guidance, wheresoe'er it lead!
Who with combined powers, their wit employ'd
The pigs sleep in the stye; the bookman comes--
Tho' here they scrape, an' squeeze, an' growl,
But oh, if he's faithless, and minds na his Nannie,
Which her own clay shall cover, heaped and pent,
Strange thunders from the potency of song;
That thou dost know of things mysterious,
Into the gentle bosom of thy love.
And beard them, though they be more fang'd than wolves and
A strait soon came: my friend I try'd;
Since, thy gay morn of life o'ercast,
Foiled, bleeding, breathless, furious to the last,
So may he hae auld stanes in store,
To mak a tour, an' tak' a whirl,
Then must I plunge again into the crowd,
While quacks of state must each produce his plan,
He held one in his hands to sing,
And you deep read in hell's black grammar,
For here, in truth, it doth not well belong
Change cheats the landscape every day,
And buried from all godlike exercise
Favour this gentle youth; his days are wild
And most serene of aspect, and most clear;
Tell him, I have you in my world of blisses:
Stranger to brinks, and often to a crown;
Nae ray of fame was to be found:
For the first time, since first he harbour'd in
The sun right up above the mast
So Robin write and let us quickly see
For temp'ral gifts we little merit;
And the thyme it is wither'd, and rue is in prime.
My boundly reverence, that I cannot trace
She set herself, high-thoughted, how to dress
In his snowy camese  and his shaggy capote?
And stifle, dark, the feebly-bursting cry:
Nor with hot fingers, nor with temples bursting:
An' there will be folk from St. Mary's,
He kept an anxious ear. The humming tone
Good sense and taste are natives here at home:
Four steeds that spurn the rein, as swift as shy,
The cave-lodg'd beggar, with a conscience clear,
Ye Vulcan's sons of Wanlockhead,
Here represent their shadowy presences,
I spier'd for my cousin fu' couthy and sweet,
And soft voluptuous couches breathed repose,
Of thron'd Apollo, could breathe back the lyre
But Doctor Hornbook, wi' his art
And drank, "Young man, now sleep ye soun'."
Around his demon eyes! Corinthians, see!
He's doyl't and he's dozin', his bluid it is frozen,
Thee, Hamilton, and Aiken dear,
To hear the speckled thrushes, and see feed
Why are you in this mighty fret?
Slumbering there, the fox's prize.
That the fair visitant at last unwound
A gallant vessel: soon she seem'd to sink
In all th' omnipotence of rule and power;
Of its own beauty is the mind diseased,
Wastes its fair bloom upon the night;
With horrid warning gaped wide,
In every place where infant Orpheus slept.
There may-bloom with its little threads
Not only hear, but patronize, befriend them,
But man would mar them with an impious hand:
And in her freaks, on every feature
Or if the Swede, before he halt,
Thus violate thy bower's sanctity!
Arous'd by blust'ring winds an' spotting thowes,
To Flora, and a nightingale shall light
The boy might climb the nest in thy young boughs
His talk o' Hell, where devils dwell,
And larks, though paths go closely bye,
The rude earth's tenants, were my first relief:
To pick up the keep-sake intended for me.
Ye need na doubt, I held my wisht;
And I, amused, with less of wit than will,
Wild strawberries like her lips
I'm in durance for life and a day.
He's grown sae weel acquaint wi' Buchan
And water blobs and all their golden kin
But men's thoughts were the steps which paved thy throne,
And love Earth only for its earthly sake?
Comes down upon the waters! all its hues,
Hornets that summer warmed to fly,
Through storm and darkness yawns the rending ground--
But not too humbly, or she will despise
Approach the spot when she is there.
Comes that agrees with summer well.
Have made lands where their fancies dwell
"There is no god but God!--to prayer--lo! God is great!"
And by the roadside danger's self defy;
What is there in those distant hills
When ne'er a body heard or saw.
The day of sacrifice? Or, have new sorrows
It ne'er cam i' their heads to doubt it,
A most delightful tale pursuing!
_Their_ admiration thy best weapon shone;
Where the blue cap "_tootle tee_"
Breathing in the breeze that fans her,
Leaps the live thunder! Not from one lone cloud,
He was content to let her amorous plea
Wi' kindling fury in their breasts;
Cauld is the blast upon my pale cheek,
An outcast thrown in sorrow's way,
The music of thy voice I heard,
By gradual decay from beauty fell,
What Exile from himself can flee?
I'll seek nae mair o' heaven to share,
And why? this shepherd's purse that grows
Came louder, and behold, there as he lay,
Binding all things with beauty;--'twould disarm
Her lovely form, her native ease,
While Jenny hafflins is afraid to speak;
When "Catch the thief!" resounds aloud;
And, in its marriage robe, the heavy body wound.[45:A]
To make a happy fire-side clime
Bawl freedom loud and then oppress the free;
That one pound one, I sairly want it,
No tumbling water ever spake romance,
'Till first ae caper, syne anither,
And spots, where still a beauty clings,
Goddess of Wisdom! here thy temple was,
She lea'es them gashin' at their cracks,
O Kenmure's on and awa, Willie!
And old companions once, as ye may be;
Wealth--Vice--Corruption,--Barbarism at last.
She put the cup to her rosy lips,
Greece! change thy lords, thy state is still the same;
Doom'd to share thy fiery fate,
Departed Whigs enjoy the fight,
And there was mounting in hot haste--the steed,
He turns agen and drives the noisy crowd
A love immortal, an immortal too.
The simple Bard, rough at the rustic plough,
Where envy's sneer was never seen,
Like a trained falcon, in the Gallic van,
The hunter now has left the moor,
An' tho' at last they catch them fast,
An' send him to his dicing box,
Among them, but not of them --in a shroud
They groan'd, they stirr'd, they all uprose,
Tells how a neebor lad cam o'er the moor,
What am I? Nothing: but not so art thou,
Triumphant crushin't like a mussel
Eternal whispers, glooms, the birth, life, death
How true is love to pure desert,
By her in stature the tall Amazon
Hale be your heart, hale be your fiddle;
Fareweel, my rhyme-composing billie!
And when with such-like tattle they begin,
Let these too go--for waking Reason deems
In her young days, beside the wood,
All suddenly were silent. A soft blending
He stands not still, but or decays, or grows
Watching at eve upon the Giant Height,
The hairum-scarum, ram-stam boys,
Whose names are Mausoleums of the Muse,
Deposed him gently from his throne of force,
Ye'll fin' him just an honest man;
By valour wins each captive maid;--
--For they want some for tea and some for wine
Backwards and forwards half her length
The shepherd, in the flow'ry glen,
The coming wind doth roar more loud;
Are shouting to each other still:
In two days more I must have died.
That night enlisted in the core,
Of our dull, uninspired, snail-paced lives.
Till round his wither'd lips had gone a smile.
Wi' Lizzie's lass, three times I trow--
Could keep him off so long? They spake a tale
Their grushie weans, an' faithfu' wives;
And glossy was his coat to see,
Says the tinker, I've brawled till no breath I have got
Have mercy, Goddess! Circe, feel my prayer!"
Ye woods that shed on a' the winds
But truce with abstraction, and truce with a muse,
Of sorrows at his words; at last with pain
(A sight, life's sorrows to repulse,
These fourteen years, by strong indentures;
I'll tak what Heav'n will sen' me, O:
She quite forgot to send the Doctor,
Expires in rags, unknown, and goes to Heav'n.
An honest friend's a precious gift,
Voiceless, or hoarse with loud tormented streams:
When thou dost shed a tear: explain thy griefs
At sight of the dejected King of Day,
When twilight did my Graunie summon,
And gallant Sir Robert, deep-read in old wines.
Thereby more conquer'd, than by us the rule
His task and mine alike are nearly done;
When skirlin' weanies see the light,
And Harley  rouses all the god in man.
At which he straightway started, and 'gan tell
Hum about globes of clover and sweet peas,
That men, who might have tower'd in the van
My sad, love-lorn lamentings claim;
We'll tak a cup o' kindness yet,
In which the burthen of the mystery,
What are they?--The haunt of the tyrant and slave!
O, how past descriving had then been my bliss,
Five rusty teeth, forbye a stump,
And oh, her widow'd heart is sair,
One blast might chill him into misery.
Through all their labyrinths; and let the maid
Where first I own'd my maiden love,
"O tell me, Angela, by the holy loom
Ah, what perplexity! Ah, well a day!
Gie fools their silks, and knaves their wine,
Less lovely or more powerful, and couldst claim
Such a parcel of rogues in a nation.
Sae I'll rejoice the lee-lang day
In Eighty-eight, ye ken, was ta'en,
But thou to please wert nurtured so completely
Can others teach the course to steer,
My mirth and guid humour are coin in my pouch,
Of everything that stirs she dreameth wrong
And eyes at horrid working. Nearest him
Where reeded grass, breast-high and undisturbed,
Lashed from the crystal roof by fishes' tails.
Would strew sweet flowers on a sterile beach.
Have ye tippled drink more fine
And while, for rhymes, I search around the poles,
I pillow my head on the sweets of the rose,
Thee safely through these wonders for sweet ends.
He had the passion and the power to roam;
Ye heathy wastes, immix'd with reedy fens;
The evening star: and once when he awoke
To the wide-spreaded night above her towers.
Now in the days of youthful prime
Discordant jar thy bosom-chords among;
Even bees, the little almsmen of spring-bowers,
To watch his slumber through. 'Tis well nigh pass'd,
Shewing tooth, tusk, and venom-bag, and sting!
Earth paved like Heaven--and to seem such to me,
And Peggy took her milk pails still,
Peona, mayst return to me. I own
What may pass within this bower,--
For great enfranchisement. O weep no more;
To bow for gratitude before Jove's throne.
Wha ever wi' Kerroughtree meets
O haith, she's doubly dear again!
There I'll bury alive and in silence decay.
Because into his depth Cimmerian
And I, a bird to shelter there,
And oar'd himself along with majesty;
And with a sympathetic touch unbinds
I said there was naething I hated like men,
And by some devilish cantrip slight
When ither folk are busy sawin?"
The race of life becomes a hopeless flight
But this is not my theme; and I return
May gravels round his blather wrench,
Through the dark pillars of those sylvan aisles.
But secret love will break my heart,
His weary limbs, bathing an hour's space,
So that I felt a movement in my heart
Guid speed an' furder to you, Johnny,
Amid life's thorny path o' care.
Serving for lamp or lantern well;
Ends:--Some, with hope replenished and rebuoyed,
And write how dear I love thee.
Of towns and cities, I have owed to them,
Raving winds around her blowing,
Dost thou now lave thy feet and ankles white?
The swats sae ream'd in Tammie's noddle,
Where the dark-leav'd laburnum's drooping clusters
Our patron, honest man! Glencairn,
Itself with dancing bulrush, and the bream
I never drank the Muses' stank,
Nor leaping torrents when they howl;
Then slowly tear him from the 'witching scene,
And towards her stept: she, like a moon in wane,
For who can write and speak as thou and I?
How can I to the tuneful strain attend?
Alas, I must not think--by Phœbe, no!
Sepulchred, where no kindled incense burns,
And would to Common-sense for once betray'd them,
Where was thine Ægis, Pallas! that appalled
And his clear siller buckles they dazzle us a'.
When mariners would madly meet their doom
And now again 'tis black,--and now, the glee
Their tomb was simple, and without a bust,
Can I find reason why ye should be thus:
As I stood by yon roofless tower,
And lang before the gray morn cam,
The sabre is sheathed and the battle is o'er.
All blisses be upon thee, my sweet son!"--
Aye, I have seen these signs in one of heaven,
And merry hae I been shapin' a spoon;
And blessed the King, and wished his country peace;
In peace upon my watery pillow: now
What, but thee Sleep? Soft closer of our eyes!
Of all unworthiness; and how the strong of arm
Long life, my Lord, an' health be yours,
And gathering tears, and tremblings of distress,
The last, sad, mournful rites bestow."
And only Healer when the heart hath bled;
And put my braid sword in the same;
Not so much life as on a summer's day
'Till, by the heel and hand admonish'd,
The pedant in his left hand clutched him fast,
A beardless boy comes o'er the hills,
This is not Solitude--'tis but to hold
The apostle of Affliction, he who threw
Some less majestic, less belovéd head?
Not the minutest whisper does it send
Till I had bodied forth the heated mind
She's a' bedevil'd with the spavie.
In richest ore the brightest jewel set!
But renovates and lives?--Thus, in the bower,
Mingled with fears to drop the fortune's fee,
New christ'ning towns far and near;
It was a vision.--In the drowsy gloom,
Pillow'd in lovely idleness, nor dream'st
When from my arms my babe they took,
To that same feather'd lyrist, who straightway,
Cease, Fool! the fate of Gods may well be thine:
And to the fond Idolaters of old
While she, my cruel, scornfu' fair,
My hen's rich nest through long grass scarce espied;
I guess by the love rolling e'e;
A bard who detested all sadness and spleen,
And the big rain comes dancing to the earth!
And share the mantle which she flung
An' tho' forfoughten sair enough,
Are honoured by the Nations--let it be--
Though mine was of the beaten gold
Yet thistles prick so deep that he
Ance ye were streekit o'er frae bank to bank!
He quite forgot his holly whip,
Thou clears the head o' doited Lear;
A poet caught as he was journeying
Well deemed the little God his ancient sway was o'er.
And trusty Glenriddel, so skill'd in old coins;
As if the Memory of some deadly feud
I held the gate till you I met,
Among the dead: She withers, like a palm
But, by my sooth, she'll wait a wee!
Come from the chittering cricket, bird, and bee,
When all the flow'rs were fresh and gay,
(It soothes poor misery, hearkening to her tale,)
This must he feel, the true-born son of Greece,
Death had come sudden; for no jot he mov'd,
That to my latest draught of life
My gallant braw John Highlandman.
When a-milking you repair, bonny Mary O!
The Olympian eagle's vision, is dark,
"To steal my Basil-pot away from me."
Her eyes were open, but she still beheld,
Flashing and cast around: of all the band,
And were it humbler it in sooth were sweet;
There are no ears to hear, or eyes to see,--
Without, at least, ae honest man,
That young ones' stories were preferred to old,
Your dear remembrance in my breast,
It chanc'd his new-come neebor took his e'e,
Than Dryope's lone lulling of her child;
That fickle heart of thine, my Katy!
Thou standest:--Mother of the mighty heart,
Her thirteen hundred years of freedom done,
He wad na hecht them courtly gifts,
The trees and bushes round the place
You must mention the third token
And all around--But wherefore this to thee
When pain disturbs my peace and rest,
Or shall the tree be envious of the dove
Over the trippings of a little child:
And in your wicked, dru'ken rants,
And books to read at candle light;
And bring the lassie back to me
The Bride hath pac'd into the Hall,
Out over the Forth I look to the north,
For I have seen my sons most unlike Gods.
The sun was sinking in the west,
Ah, happy Lycius!--for she was a maid
They witness'd in their shade yestreen.
An' spread abreed thy weel-fill'd brisket,
That curse shall be Forgiveness.--Have I not--
And bloomy grapes laughing from green attire;
Wha rate the wearer by the cloak,
From where large Hercules wound up his story
The daisy amus'd my fond fancy,
"If I'm design'd yon lordling's slave--
That ought to frighten into hooded shame
Lives in the village still about the farms,
Clear as its current, glide the sauntering hours
My daddie says, gin I'll forsake him,
Smoothing the deed where law sharks set their gin
But an honest man's aboon his might,
A boy no sae black at the bane,
Bereft of all that now my life endears?
Love in a hut, with water and a crust,
And weel I wat her willing mou',
Inspir'd, I turn'd Fate's sybil leaf
Before that care-worn sage, who trembling felt
And from the mirror'd level where he stood
She looks again--her arms are up--
With tumult, disquiet, rebellion, and strife;
A woe-worn ghaist I hameward glide.
Though, leaning on my spade to rest,
Reluctant, E stalk'd in; with piteous race
Dish'd up in her winding sheet,
Here, where the Scottish muse immortal lives,
My father dear, and brethren three.
What are vain Hopes?--The puffing gale of morn,
Now the cat has ta'en her seat,
His frequent, unpremeditated song,
After a thousand mazes overgone,
Poor thoughtless wench! it seems but Sunday past
Thy lute-voic'd brother will I sing ere long,
Auld Coila, now, may fidge fu' fain,
Its own existence, of remotest glooms.
Or of those silver lamps that burn on high,
Of Armida the fair, and Rinaldo the bold?
With France's forest lilies on thy brow.
But the heavens denied success.
Define their pettish limits, and estrange
Fill'd out its voice, and died away again.
Thou dart of heaven that flashest by,
The narrow path that hay laid meadow yields,
Unto what awful power shall I call?
Or nobly fling the gospel club,
For I am brimfull of the friendliness
Convolvulus in streaked vases flush;
By early poverty to hardship steel'd,
No more to sigh, or shed the bitter tear,
Came like an inspiration; and he shouted,
A storm whereon they ride, to sink at last,
Here's a health to them that's awa,
To feel this sun-rise and its glories old.
My sister, she will weep in vain,
With airy hat of straw, and apron blue,
There wild-woods grow, and rivers row,
(That Bards are second-sighted is nae joke,
And Ice mast-high came floating by
Till into formal rows the russet shocks
In his immortal spirit, been as free
Some holy bark let forth an anthem sweet,
The Father cracks of horses, pleughs, and kye.
Maria, send me too thy griefs and cares;
And I have loved thee, Ocean! and my joy
(Th' enamour'd laurels kiss her brows!)
Driv'n by fortune's felly spite,
That whisper round a temple become soon
But where the ship's huge shadow lay,
I on the Questions targe them tightly;
But this that I am gaun to tell,
To whom she renders back the debt of blood
On her long tresses, which might yet recall,
I joyless view thy trembling horn,
No voice; but O! the silence sank,
On yon long level plain, at distance crowned
Yet feel I little of the cool bleak air,
Nor was all Love shut from him, though his days
Was then our Guardian, and is still our Guide;
"L--d G--d!" quoth he, "I have it now,
Drew blades o' death, 'till, out o' breath,
While Fate seem'd strangled in my nervous grasp?
The sun blinks kindly in the biel',
And stole my heart away complete.
Here, tumbling billows mark'd the coast,
An' if she promise auld or young
Friendship, love, and peace restore;
But nae ane could their fancy please,
Come from the gloomy tun with merry shine.
Where ruby lips are kissed as free,
The curtain draws of nature's rest,
What's no his ain, he winna tak it;
When one sank in, to rise no more!
Or sinking as the light wind lives or dies;
Offering to him, and his, a populous solitude.
Wi' ghastly e'e, poor tweedle-dee
Horrors which nourish an uneasiness
To take him to a desert rude, and bare.
The edges of the blackthorn clumps in gold.
And blankets were about him pinn'd;
Himself with every mystery, and awe;
Where the gray stones and unmolested grass
Duncan, gin ye'll keep your aith,
In my last plack thy part's be in't
Such views the youthful bard allure,
Gin ye'll go there, yon runkl'd pair,
A thousand willing agents to obey,
The summer time away. One track unseams
She drops her head at every passer bye.
But nature sicken'd on the e'e.
At service out amang the farmers roun':
An' rouse their holy thunder on it
In the sad midnight, while thy heart still bled,
Jove's daughter, and be reckon'd of his house.
Reclined that banner, erst in fields unfurl'd,
Down from the rivulets, red with dashing rains,
Who feels no fear to stain her gown
Altho' thy beauty and thy grace
Look on its broken arch, its ruined wall,
Cease, ye prudes, your envious railings,
Of Ops the queen all clouded round from sight;
Some drops of joy with draughts of ill between:
That never gives--tho' humbly takes enough;
Let majesty your first attention summon,
With home-bred pictures many a one,
The rock shone bright, the kirk no less
Here Folly still his votaries inthralls;
They never wi' her can compare:
Look'd asklent and unco skeigh,
And, for my tortur'd brain begins to craze,
Through banks whose beauty would endure for ever
While busy preparation shook the court,
A' the lang night I cuddle my kimmer,
Will try to gie us songs and plays at hame?
The wolf has come to me to-night,
He heard the busy hum of warrior-men
To rob Life's fatal apple-tree,
Ah! tho' his work unknown, far happier there, I ween!
Spite of despondence, of the inhuman dearth
Bursting to light in terrible array!
And some that smoke, and some that play, are found;
For whan we tirl'd at your door,
And names that must not wither, though the Earth
The squirrel dances up and runs across.
Worthy a king's--or more--a Roman's bed?
The devil he swore by the edge o' his knife,
The kettle-drum, and far-heard clarionet,
Somewhere between the throne, and where I sit
Her piercing beauty struck my heart,
*       *       *       *       *
Then hey for a lass wi' a tocher;
He begged, for Gudesake, I wad be his wife,
Sent up, in silence, from among the trees,
To daunton me, and me sae young,
But to that gentle touch, through brain and breast
Into the nothingness of scorn and noise,
Thee sitting careless on a granary floor,
Made every eastern cloud a silvery pyre
An' set your beauties a' abread!
Despondence seiz'd again the fallen Gods
In thy sweet sang, Barbauld, survives
"Craigdarroch, thou'lt soar when creation shall sink;
Not all the marvels of Barossa's fight,
With earth and water, on the stumps of trees.
For me, before a monarch's face,
They laid him out upon the floor,
What fruits of fragrance blush on every tree!
And pluck the sorrow from our huntsmen's brows.
And still his honied wealth Hymettus  yields;
Grat his een baith bleer't and blin',
Oft-times I thought to run away;
The house, the dame, the garden known no more:
Eternal oaths and vows they interchange,
Both keep their pace that nothing can provoke
For, ance that five-an'-forty's speel'd,
Around me, and a dying Glory smiles
The brain, new stuff'd, in youth, with triumphs gay
He must wait the new broach and bemoisten his clay.
Three merry boys, I trow, are we;
That heart that lo'ed me dearly--
But when the melancholy fit shall fall
Than een its coldness did before,
Speechless they eyed each other, and about
So that no wonder waits him--nor below
His knife see rustic-labour dight,
Thy very weeds are beautiful--thy waste
How one has oft been known to prance
Will stop thy little tale or song
If haply Knowledge, on a random tramp,
When shall I see that honour'd land,
Dare tell the tale to Hughie Graham.
To try my fate in guid black prent;
With horses prancing o'er them, palaces
Farewell the plain sae rushy, O!
Especial, rams that cross the breed,
Or why sae sweet a flower as love
And hills all rich with blossomed trees,
More sweet than garden flowers,
This beauty in its birth--Despair! despair!
She found me roots of relish sweet,
As plump an' gray as onie grozet;
_Arise then! for the hen-dove shall not hatch
And daisy flowers; the buds swell on the trees;
From chance to put their plunder in;--
Amid the hoarse alarm of Corinth's voice.
Real happiness with little gain,
At whose white feet the languid Tritons poured
Like herded elephants; nor felt, nor prest
Tho' rich is the breeze in their gay sunny valleys,
And now I view thee--'tis, alas, with shame
Yet simple Bob the victory got,
Thou sat as lang as thou had siller;
And last new favours of some veigling beau,
He paidles out, an' he paidles in,
He knows each chord--its various tone,
But now he lags on death's hog-score,
For nature's objects ever harmonize
My kingdom's at its death, and just it is
Then plunging headlong down and down, and on
Nae mair, to me, the autumn winds
Friendship! 'tis all cold duty now allows.
A little Fiend that scoffs incessantly,
Then the fields were sudden bare and the sky got overcast
Thou beautiful Jewess, content thou mayest roam;
And dearest bliss, is Lucy fair.
Who dwelleth in her hospitable home
An' now, ye chosen Five-and-Forty,
Where wild in the woodlands the primroses blow!
With fennel green, and balm, and golden pines,
The natural hue of health, from vermeil lips?--
Sae hale and hearty every shank,
And afterwards, by my good father taught,
The surgy murmurs of the lonely sea.
To see the rose and woodbine twine;
At length wi' drink and courting dizzy
Life's hopes waste all to nothingness away
In spite of all the folks that swarm
Ye sprightly youths, quite flushed with hope and spirit,
My dearest member nearly dozen'd,
The friend of man, to vice alone a foe;
Leeze me on thee, John Barleycorn,
But keek thro' ev'ry other man,
Amang its native briers sae coy;
As those who, safe together met alone
My Peggy's face, my Peggy's form,
Who at the top curl up a shaggy mane,
The hindmost shaird, they'll fetch it wi' them,
She's worth a ploughman's ransom
But chiefly the woods were her fav'rite resort,
Because he gat the toom-dish thrice,
Wroth as himself. He look'd upon them all,
To keep off mildews, and all weather harms:
'Till chiels gat up an' wad confute it,
They're not worthy of your songs
The muse should tell, in labour'd strains,
Attract thy fairy fingers near the Lyre
Heaven shield thee for thine utter loveliness!
Misfortune's lighten'd steps might wander wild;
My waking must have been! disgust, and hate,
And every leaf, and every flower
Hence sweet harmonious Beattie sung
The garland of Eternity, where wave
Now blessings on the man, whoe'er he be,
jewelry passes away into a common spring morning full of budding
Numb were the Beadsman's fingers, while he told
I often think the West is gone,
For sure 'twere impious to despair,
Have oft withstood assailing war,
They never wi' her can compare:
O joy! for now I see a thousand eyes
And all ye many sparkling stars of night;
Wild but not rude, awful yet not austere,
A shielded scutcheon blush'd with blood of queens and kings.
The scarce seen shapes of flowers,
The Suabian sued, and now the Austrian reigns--
When fevers burn, or ague freezes,
I canna' say but they do gaylies;
A correspondence fix'd wi' Heav'n
Who, suddenly, should stoop through the smooth wind,
Saying, "Mercy, Porphyro! hie thee from this place;
No more, ye warblers of the wood--no more!
And rigid ranks of iron--whence who dares
And, but once kindled, quenchless evermore,
Slaves, eunuchs, soldiers, guests, and santons  wait;
Of waistcoats Harry has no lack,
Ye babbling winds, in silence sweep;
Full loud a moment and then low again.
Which in my Spirit dwelt is fluttering, faint, and low.
He that is lonely--hither let him roam,
Bacchus, young Bacchus! good or ill betide,
The pond'rous wall and massy bar,
But, by the L--d, tho' I should beg
A robe of seeming truth and trust
Before young Bacchus' eye-wink turning pale.--
His arms a dart, he fights aloof, nor more
Quoth he the man hath penance done,
Then, lovely baby, do not fear!
Then was appalling silence: then a sight
With songs of misery, music of our woes;
In yonder rippling bay, their naval host
The wind blew hollow frae the hills,
As every animal assists his kind
My heart has left its dwelling-place
She will mix these pleasures up
Aside for ever: it may be a sound--
In long perspective, and continually
And the bright Titan, phrenzied with new woes,
Spenserian vowels that elope with ease,
With steps unequal; for the Roman's mind
And corn wav'd green in ilka field,
Of a' dimensions, shapes, an' mettles,
Such seeds within her breast, or Europe no such shore?
Where parents live and are forgot,
There moulders here a gallant heart--
The shrinking bard adown the alley skulks,
And hoping chink, she talked of morts of luck:
With mournful joy, to think that others felt
But midst the crowd, the hum, the shock of men,
Sometimes, when the good Knight his rest would take,
Squadrons extended long and large,
Time looks on pomp with vengeful mood
Thy valley of sweet waters, were to know
And now she works her mammie's wark,
O Lord, preserve us frae the gallows!
Indeed I am--thwarted, affrighted, chidden,
And glides with glassy foot o'er yon melodious wave.
My poor heart then break it must,
Which the stern dotard deemed he could encage,
With the sharp scythe of conflict, then to see
'Tis but the tender fierceness of the dove,
Peace waits us on the shores of Acheron:
Your lutes, and gentler fate?--
Sorely she wept until the night came on,
So from the turf outsprang two steeds jet-black,
To Cupid now with hearty prayer
As father Adam first was fool'd,
Nae mair ungen'rous wish I hae,
She's turn'd you aff, a human creature
And, silent as a consecrated urn,
But not for you will Freedom's Altars flame.
Yet ere thou leavest me in utter woe,
An' save the honour o' the nation?
Led them o'er rocks and past the dangerous swamp,
And that affectionate light, those diamond things,
Or Death's unlovely, dreary, dark abode?
Of sapphire columns, or fantastic bridge
And on flags sleep dragon flies, bonny Mary O!
Than sighs could fathom, or contentment reach:
Would not be seen the arméd torrents poured
With tears I pity thy unhappy fate!
And much-wrong'd Mis'ry pours th' unpitied wail!
The brightest through these parted hills hath forked
Rode past fair Florence, to where Arno's stream
And shooting meteors caught the startled eye.
And soon may they expire, unblest with resurrection!
And made those dazzled thousands veil their eyes
Alone: I chant alone the holy mass,
I charge you disturb not my slumbering fair.
From their sweet thrall, and forward gently bending,
Here lies wha weel had won thy praise--
Rectangle-triangle, the figure we'll choose,
Or seen my mind's convulsion leave it weak;
Childe Harold was he hight: --but whence his name
But he revives at once: for who beholds
And gnash their fangs, loud yelling for the prey!
First, neist the fire, in auld red rags,
No voice, no lute, no pipe, no incense sweet
The hopeful youth, in Scottish senate bred,
"An' niest my yowie, silly thing,
The Paynim turban and the Christian crest
His glories: with a puling infant's force
As night and morning we have sought our cows,
Perhaps her love like mine is but unknown--
For they resolved in some forest dim
Fain would I echo back each pleasant note
But a' the charms o' the Indies
Still in his beam Mendeli's marbles glare:
Others now claim your chief regard;
No help, nor hope, nor view had I,
The stillness of their aspect in each trace
Awake! arise! my love, and fearless be,
With many a retrospection curst;
Edward will come with you, and pray,
They hoy't out Will, wi sair advice;
I am but rightly serv'd." So saying, he
The spreading blue bells: it may haply mourn
Long did I bear the heavy yoke,
Whose flitting lantern, through rude nettle-briar,
And make his heart a spirit; he who knows
And bring no book, for this one day
Should be shut from thee, as a spell still fraught
Their rich brimm'd goblets, that incessant run
For power to speak; but still the ruddy tide
The tythe o' what ye waste at cartes
As of some breathless racers whose hopes poize
To tinge, on syren shores, the salt sea-spry?
Altho' ten Grahams were in his coat,
Full in the middle of this pleasantness
Or the car rattling o'er the stony street;
An' German gentles are but sma',
Would he move--so as yet they made nothing of land;
The God of Life, and Poesy, and Light--
Or rapt Isaiah's wild, seraphic fire;
But court na anither, tho' jokin' ye be,
But ever to himself he mutters,
Deafening the swallow's twitter, came a thrill
The wale o' cocks for fun an' drinkin'!
Here, for my wonted rhyming raptures,
The palace, rising on its verdant side;
For they can lure no further; and the ray
Perhaps, and no unlikely thought!
But sleeps till sunrise calls him up,
And een repressed the laugh or smile--
But one of the whole mammoth-brood still kept
Lispings empyrean will I sometime teach
The little flow'ret's peaceful lot,
Sometimes goldfinches one by one will drop
Shrinks farther from the sight of men.
Till all his substance fell into decay.
She snuffs and barks if any passes bye
The ither flutters o'er the rising piers:
"Or my Staff shall make thee skip."
And while I kittle hair on thairms,
While ilka thing in nature join
On either side. These, gentle Calidore
May coward shame distain his name,
My brain bewilder'd, and my mind o'ercast
Or meet a heath of furze in flower,
The mower's stubbling scythe clogs to his foot
Wide, o'er the naked world declare
But then, nae thanks to him for a' that;
In thee, high Heaven above was truest shown,
When I have cast this serpent-skin of woe?--
An' hey for the sanctified M----y,
He dips in gall unmix'd his eager pen,--
But in her tone and look he read the rest.
My much-honour'd Patron, believe your poor poet,
For gumlie dubs of your ain delvin'!
An' buirdly chiels, an' clever hizzies,
And hear my vows o' truth and love,
Happy as holiday-enjoying face,
Thus day seems turned to night, and tries to wake in vain.
Endymion said: "Are not our fates all cast?
Well known when joy was beating high,
Mark Scotia's fond returning eye--
But tak' it like the unback'd filly,
They made themselves a fearful monument!
The green bough's motionless and dead;
I read, and loved the books in which I read;
But History's purchased page to call them great?
Sweet Indian, I would see thee once again.
To dive into the deepest. Dark, nor light,
That love belongs to sin and death.
But yet, O Lord! confess I must,
Under the keel nine fathom deep
Tho', thanks to Heaven, I dare even that last shift!
The Tailor fell thro' the bed, thimbles an' a',
Some friendly monster, pitying my sad state,
"See, brother, see! how graciously
And yonder towers the Prince's palace fair:
Catching the notes of Philomel,--an eye
Yet wishes you like us in health the same
All in this mottie, misty clime,
Committed to the darkness and the gloom:
Of wood and field their many mingling greens,
Was it a vision, or a waking dream?
He prayeth well who loveth well
Few heads with knowledge so inform'd:
Scorn at least to be his slave.
To frown, and when she deigns to smile
Or great M'Kinlay  thrawn his heel?
Sad Zephyr droops the clouds like weeping willow:
Like a young Jove with calm uneager face,
And intertwined the cassia's arms unite,
For ever wilt thou love, and she be fair!
Not of these days, but long ago 'twas told
More than one pretty, trifling thousand years;
(Ere War uprose in his volcanic rage,)
Presents immortal bowers to mortal sense;
Of covert flowers in vain; and then he flung
But yet despite the kittle kimmer,
He saw the giant sea above his head.
Mingled with ceaseless bleatings of his sheep:
Again I shake your hand,--friend Charles, good night.
God! she is like a milk-white lamb that bleats
But to the hen-birds unco civil:
To cousin Kate, an' sister Janet;
As eagerly the barred-up bird will beat
I will fight France with you, Dumourier;
Hangs on the willow her unstrung guitar,
I'll write, an' that a hearty blaud,
Collecting the chief trophies of her line,
But Phemie was the blithest lass
I'll come na mair to thy bower-door,
But still he slept. At last they interwove
Baith their disease, and what will mend it,
And there beside the thorn she sits
Such partings break the heart they fondly hope to heal.
O steer her up and haud her gaun--
They dwindled, dwindled, one by one,
And Betty's most especial charge,
Until they think warm days will never cease,
For Royce Wood and its shielding bough.
Ere twice the shades o' dawn are fled,
Old Atlas' children? Art a maid of the waters,
Sae jimply lac'd her genty waist,
The bauld Pitcur fell in a furr,
Her pearl round ears, white neck, and orbed brow;
No hand to help them in distress:
The ducks and ducklings float and feed.
The fair-grown yew tree, for a chosen bow:
Sweet Nature's garb of verdant green
Beside whose trunk the gipsy makes his bed.
An ocean dim, sprinkled with many an isle,
L--d, man, there's lasses there wad force
Bright eyes, fair cheeks, and ruby lips,
With any pleasure on me, do not bid
From the loud roar of foaming calumny
Our sad decay in Church and State
Is there a man, whose judgment clear,
And magic in the ruined battlement,
What farther clishmaclaver might been said,
Are judges of mortar and stone, Sir,
The darkest place that quiet ever made,
Here in the sultriest season let him rest,
What my enjoyments in my youthful years,
Three blither hearts, that lee-lang night
Buttress'd from moonlight, stands he, and implores
But Betty, poor good woman! she,
Storms louder own God is their home,
Art thou now forested? O woodland Queen,
She form'd of various parts the various man.
As though some knotty problem, that had daft
She's had mischief enough already,
That Goodness is no name--and Happiness no dream.
But blasts that break the blossom down
Which this poetic marble hath arrayed
I could e'en Dido of her grief beguile;
For the sure grave to level him; few years
The deil's awa wi' the Exciseman:
Thou seest not all--but piecemeal thou must break,
The Miller he hecht her a heart leal and loving;
Ready to snort their streams. In this cool wonder
Both are but theatres--where the chief actors rot.
These northern scenes with weary feet I trace;
My heart's in the Highlands wherever I go.
While thistles wear their heavy knobs of bloom
With the ready trick and fable,
Then thus again the brilliance feminine:
Of leaves and trembled blossoms, where there ran
In politics and politicians' lies
An' here his body lies fu' low--
And pricks her hand and throws her flowers away
The clock is on the stroke of twelve,
That was and is not--yet to see
And all my knowledge is that joy is gone,
But gaze beneath thy cloudy canopy
But splendider in Saturn's, whose hoar locks
Rich with a sprinkling of fair musk-rose blooms:
"Oh Sir! you know I'm Betty Foy,
Seems royal still, though with her head discrowned,
But I, wi' my sweet nurslings here,
Feigning a sleep; and he to the dull shade
Till God knows what may be effected
Then do not weep and grieve for me;
Wha luckily roars in the right.
There's neither doctor nor his guide.
As if the ebbing air had but one wave;
"Too frail of heart! for this lost nymph of thine,
The fatal spell, and still it draws us on,
A cloudy Cupid, with his bow and quiver;
Then you, ye auld, snick-drawing dog!
That passest by this grave, man,
May there my latest hours consume,
Guarding the little clover plots to bloom
'Tis well for me; thou canst not see
And we are nurtured like a pelican brood.
A life within itself, to breathe without mankind.
But, at nights, yon little cot,
He gaz'd, he wish'd, he fear'd, he blush'd,
Heaven's attribute distinguished--to bestow!
The sober eve, or hail the cheerful dawn;
To lisp, he made me kneel beside my bed,
At that oppress'd I hurried in.--Ah! where
And Hopeton falls, the generous brave!
Between Saint Johnston and bonnie Dundee.
By Oxus or in Ganges' sacred isles.
I went, at milking, where the blossoms grew,
So artless, so simple, so wild;
Oh! who is more brave than a dark Suliote,
Behold a train more fitting to inspire
To the weavers gin ye go, fair maids,
And with it light, and light, engendering
Pregnant with such a den to save the whole
Rings for those left behind their passing bell.
To wander as she loves, in liberty.
His wand against the empty air times nine.--
Glencairn, the truly noble, lies in dust;
Swifter than centaurs after rapine bent.--
There the shepherds lay with their dogs by their side,
But live and wither, cripple and still breathe
Of hideous sense; I sunk, nor step could crawl,
On that side now, and now on this,
Declar'd that she could do nae mair:
The shadow of a babe you trace,
Oer spots where deepest waters be.
Rousing the dust along the narrow lane,
And Morn in secret shall renew the tear
An' let them wander at their will;
For ere his wickedness pretended love,
But be na fley'd."--Quoth I, "Guid faith,
Like children running races who shall be
An' stay ae month amang the moons
Wi' sword in hand, before his band,
Slipt its golden clasp, and down
The landscape sleeps in mist from morn till noon;
The rantin' dog, the daddie o't.
Shook horrid with such aspen-malady:
And now ye've gien auld Britain peace,
But now his wayward bosom was unmoved,
Into the hours that have pass'd us by,
Ye, who would more of Spain and Spaniards know
On ev'ry hand it will allow'd be,
Lover of loneliness, and wandering,
But those who often pass his daily tasks
The rosy cheek, the beaming eye,
And the cobbler he tuckt up his apron and spit
She sees the scowling tempest fly:
And drops and drops till in her nest she lies,
What bursting anguish tears my heart!
Wha scarcely tent us in their way,
When Brutus made the dagger's edge surpass
Then all its buried magic, till it flush'd
But, Lord protect us! time such change does bring,
Their leafy shadows dancing on the ground.
They stood as signals to the land,
Her steed a little higher soar'd, and then
Sometimes by foes I was o'erpower'd,
Ye spak na, but gaed by like stoure;
They lengthen out the tremulous sob,
Of happiness! ye on the stubble droop,
The pedant stifles keen the Roman sound
An' faith, we'se be acquainted better,
And still she slept an azure-lidded sleep,
"O known Unknown! from whom my being sips
Soon as the twilight through the distant mist
Then back I rattle on the rhyme,
Five thousand years 'fore my creation,
Sweet chestnuts brown like soling leather turn;
A mighty forest; for the moist earth fed
A burn was clear, a glen was green,
Of genius, to flap away each sting
If there is none, he made the best of this.
Tell them, and press it on their mind,
Fanning away the dandelion's down;
And, downward, suddenly began to dip,
Coming sometimes like fearful claps of thunder,
Thou golden time o' youthfu' prime,
No sound so loud as when on curtain'd bier
Unruffled, like high Gods, ye liv'd and ruled:
In coat of orange, green, and blue
I care not for this old mysterious man!"
At skulking cats and dogs approaching nigh.
How blest ye birds that round her sing,
While with an eye made quiet by the power
The heavy mastiff, savage in the fray,
Some hand erects a cross of mouldering lath;
Upon his lips, and taken the soft lute
I would not wish the burning blaze
The upper air bursts into life,
Oft Music changed, but never ceased her tone,
But her ten-pund lands o' tocher guid
And had in mony a well been ducked.
Turn to the Mole  which Hadrian reared on high,
She kisses o'er and o'er again,
Many times have winter's shears,
Unmindful, though a weeping wife
Had been less heartfelt by him than the clang
Roll on, vain days! full reckless may ye flow,
And Belgium's Capital had gathered then
A certain Bardie's rantin, drinkin,
But ere the mingling bounds have far been passed,
The charter to chastise which she bestows
A rough-voic'd war against the dooming stars.
Are strange--nay, rather stranger than the rest.
The lass that made the bed to me!
His honest, sonsie, baws'nt face,
Implore the pausing step, and with their dyes
He's no in Stirling town this day,
Existence may be borne, and the deep root
I flatter my fancy I may get anither,
How 'twas a towmond auld, sin' lint was i' the bell.
Of sorrow for her tender favourite's woe,
Nor say my stubbornness hath lost
The iron crown of laurel's mimicked leaves;
That what is not sense must be nonsense.
Last, white-rob'd Peace, crown'd with a hazel wreath,
But surely poor folk maun be wretches!
Nor sought he friend to counsel or condole,
And the round ocean, and the living air,
From thee, my Jeany, must I part!
Had been resum'd in spite of hindering force--
All musical in its immensities;
Through a rich length of years and quiet days,
Whyles, ranging like a roaring lion,
"Kilve," said I, "was a pleasant place,
Albeit unworthy of the prey-bird's maw;
While on the meadow bridge the pausing boy
This, it should seem, was not reserved for me--
"Ha! ha!" quoth he--"full plain I see,
What goodly prospects o'er the hills expand!
There your wise Prophet's Paradise we find,
And then 'twas fit that from this mortal state
Down amang the broom, my dearie,
Ye're may be come to stap my breath;
And brotherly love be the centre.
Tho' bred amang mountains o' snaw!
Antipathies--but to recur, ere long,
There were five carlins in the south,
Or they might watch the quoit-pitchers, intent
And he oppressed. Yet he shall not die,
A bower quiet for us, and a sleep
Felt a high certainty of being blest.
When least we deem of such, calls up to view
The daring invaders they fled or they died.
O Nature! a' thy shews an' forms
Just so are these in blood and business joined;
To sit beneath a fair lone beechen tree;
At times, 'tis true, I've felt relief from pain
An' she has twa sparkling roguish een.
Flow gently, sweet Afton! disturb not her dream.
From vale to vale, from wood to wood, he flew,
Thy cruel, woe-delighted train,
To put on such a look as would say, _Shame
Dolphins were still my playmates; shapes unseen
Gilt with the summer's burnished gleam,
Except, perhaps, the robin's whistling glee,
Empty the haunted air, and gnomed mine--
Tell me thine ailment: tell me all amiss!--
I ask not the pleasures that riches supply,
The frank address, the soft caress,
Wi' ither kindred, jumping cattle,
"I saw my sons resume their ancient fire;
Which now in his house has for ages remain'd;
Girt by her theatre of hills, she reaps
But Willie follow'd, as he should,
Spares the next swath and all its twined flowers:
The bursting sigh, th' unweeting groan,
Nor, having seen thee, shall I vainly seek
Some diamond water drops, and them to treasure
A quill immortal in their joyous tears.
No, nor the Eolian twang of Love's own bow,
Tho' thou may gaily bloom awhile;
The fragrant birch, and hawthorn, hoar,
And roam along, the World's tired denizen,
Laughing the clouds away with playful scorn,
The Mother, wi' a woman's wiles, can spy
What promise hast thou faithful guarded since
But I'll sned besoms--thraw saugh woodies,
Show thy heart's secret to an ancient Power
Than I, for I n'ad sicknesse nor disese."
Nay, smile not at my sullen brow;
Work through the clayey soil and gravel hard,
Of all the brightness that mine eyes have seen!
There is too much of Man here,  to look through
Clap in his check a Highland gill,
Which gaining presently, she steered light
The well-reeved guns, the netted canopy,
Nor column trophied for triumphal show?
Like two streaks across the sky,
A murdering robber lay in wait.
Till then--and then I love thee.
And laugh out aloud when he'd finished his song.
And from the mountains where I now respire,
Or hang on tiptoe at the lifted latch;
That dearest meed is granted--honest fame;
Of this sweet spot of earth. The bowery shore
Till all the fields around him rung.
Thee, dear maid, hae I offended?
The kindled bushes with the young leaves thin
An echo of thee in the north-wind sung.
Once more through all he bursts his thundering way--
Whence ever, and anon the jay outsprings,
Adieu! the fancy cannot cheat so well
The lamps of gold--and haughty dome which vies
Vastness which grows, but grows to harmonize--
Where we on Sundays used to ramble,
And thus the heart will break, yet brokenly live on:
On all his life: his youth, up to the day
And so, when harbour'd in the sleepy west,
Though fickle Fortune has deceived me,
There I can live, and at my leisure seek
This calm luxuriance of blissful light,
When I met her in the morning when the farmers sow the rye.
Let us ay love each other; let us fare
Sweet sister, help to stem the ebbing sea
Since cold each kinder heart that might approve--
But who can view the ripened rose, nor seek
Swelling the breeze that sighed along the lengthening glen.
Would be the wonders of the sky and sea?
Made tuneable with every sweetest vow;
Most like the struggle at the gate of death;
Phoebus awhile delayed his mighty wheels,
And the cat runs to hear the whetted knife,
His path start tremulous, and once again
And fair fa' my Collier Laddie.
First bowed beneath the brunt of Hellas' sword,
Of thunderous waterfalls and torrents hoarse,
Ah! little kenn'd the reverend grannie,
Ye'd find her house as cleanly as her sen.
Yet cheerfully thou glinted forth
Be't to me, be't frae me, e'en let the jade gae:
And Circumstance, that unspiritual God
Thou dost;--but all thy foster-babes are dead--
It came like a fierce potion, drunk by chance,
But to conclude my silly rhyme,
Comes clinkin' down beside him;
Yet frequent all unheeded in his own.
Since my young days of passion--joy, or pain--
"Low lies the hand that oft was stretch'd to save,
Watching the zenith, where the milky way
Round the wide hall, and show their happy faces;
Tho' your heart's like a child,
Sires, mothers, children, in one carnage lie:
Such conduct bears Philanthropy's rare stamp:
The weeping blood in woman's breast
Yet here's his health in water!
The latest throb that leaves my heart,
Thy brain to loss of reason: and next tell
And left it scarcely crizzled oer--
Swung at his back, or tucked beneath his arm;
So from the arbour roof down swell'd an air
But as I'm sayin', please step to Dow's,
Press'd its cold hand, and wept,--and Scylla sigh'd!
In wood or wilderness, in camp or town,
At times I'm fash'd wi' fleshly lust;
O had M'Lauchlan,  thairm-inspiring Sage,
Her soothed limbs, and soul fatigued away;
But why should we to nobles jouk,
And wasted far and near with glaive and brand;
With you, kindest friends, in idea I rove;
Each turn'd his face with a ghastly pang
He has gowd in his coffers, he has owsen and kine,
All that is dear _in_ being! better far
E'er sin' they laid that curst restriction
None felt stern Nature rocking at his feet,
He, who grown aged in this world of woe,
So prays thy faithful friend, The Bard.
An' there will be maiden Kilkerran,
And, truly, I would rather be struck dumb,
Into the winds: rain-scented eglantine
Oh! dome displeasing unto British eye!
Now he proclaims, wi' tout o' trumpet,
The church might stand within and not be seen.
With every eve deeper and tenderer still;
To blow against thee: and in after years,
And elbow-deep with feverous fingering
And weakly weeps his fortune like a coward.
In spite of his dissuasion, seized a boat,
When a' the hills are cover'd wi' snaw,
But yet his speech, it was so soft and sweet,
The level meadow grass was in the swath;
Hast thou felt so content: a grievous feud
And wind-enamoured aspin--mark the leaves
Where airy voices lead: so through the hollow,
Simple, erect, severe, austere, sublime--
Her tartan petticoat she'll kilt,
Now, though he knows poor Johnny well,
With Amalek's ungracious progeny;
In tears, the sun towards that country tend
And I loved her when she hid it
Into his eyes. Ah, miserable strife,
I hae sworn by the Heavens to be true;
And living as if earth contained no tomb,--
Warbling for very joy mellifluous sorrow--
The prison gates that have so long opprest
Oh, no--it shall not pine, and pine, and pine
Until the poplar tops, in journey dreary,
And he get na hell for his haddin'
And when, more near against the marble cold
Admire--exult--despise--laugh--weep,--for here
How pale is that cheek where the rouge lately glisten'd!
An' get sic fair example straught,
When Beauty's self was sitting by,
Placed to commemorate a more than mortal lot?
That from a whiteness, as the lily clear,
Unnumber'd souls breathe out a still applause,
For puppies like you there's but few.
And sometimes like a gentle whispering
The third cam up, hap-step-an'-lowp,
Thy kindness or thy love to seek;
Enforced, at the last by ocean's foam
Kirkyards will soon be till'd eneugh,
For all thine impious proud-heart sophistries,
Alas! the lofty city! and alas!
But, midst the throng in merry masquerade,
Nature reclaimed her order:--gently flows
"It shall be as thou wishest," said the Dame:
If my Fame should be, as my fortunes are,
In days when mankind were but callans,
Freedom and whiskey gang thegither!--
A trumpet's silver voice. Ah! it was fraught
But, Lord, what's become o' the head?
Sacred to Dian? Haply, thou hast seen
An' gied you a' baith gear an' meal;
And birds sat singing, as in mornings gone,--
Should Disappointment, parent of Despair,
Darkling I listen; and, for many a time
E'en that, he does na mind it lang:
But short was even's placid smile,
You too upheld the veil from Clio's beauty,
Than a' that they can do to me.
From Cynthia's wedding and festivity?
A schoolboy's tale, the wonder of an hour!
O I never thought that joys would run away from boys,
--'Tis Johnny! Johnny! as I live.
A tinting of its quality: how light
Will in its shade securely lie.
With the immortal lights, in its eternity!
For Lords or Kings I dinna mourn,
Porphyro gazed upon her empty dress,
I still was pleas'd where'er I went,
Her reign is past, her gentle glories gone:
Of beauty, feeding on joy's luscious hours;
Though I be ashes; a far hour shall wreak
An' young an' auld cam rinnin' out,
Happy in beauty, life, and love, and every thing,
Bold may she brave grim Danger's loudest roar,
Bastion'd with pyramids of glowing gold,
To understand, not feel thy lyric flow,
Their bones, distinguished from our common clay
If thou hast ever seen me too elate,
Inspiring, bold John Barleycorn!
And honeysuckles full of clear bee-wine.
While conscious virtue all the strain endears,
That ever rose on Scotland's plain,
Not such thy sons who whilome did await,
The frequent stone is hurled where eer they go;
That I with stern delights should e'er have been so moved.
I saw pale Kings, and Princes too,
Be all about me when I make an end.
One step? Imagine further, line by line,
And gowden flowers sae rare upon't;
But chiefly the nettle, so typical, shower,
Which heeds nor keen Reproach nor partial Praise,
Against an endless storm. Moreover too,
Think, when your castigated pulse
"Now wenches listen, and let lovers lie,
May sigh my love unto her pitying!
Its noise I cannot bear to hear,
"That eats the she-wolf's young.
For willing service; whether to surprise
When beneath old Lea Close oak I the bottom branches broke
And runs to seek them when they lay away
Behind a broad hall-pillar, far beyond
Kilmarnock wabsters fidge an' claw,
Stained with the berries of the brambly wood
Pride, power, love, wealth, and all
Without that modest softening that enhances
He of the rose, the violet, the spring.
Prepar'd Power's proudest frown to brave,
Like thunder clouds that spake to Babylon,
The last half way behind, by distance vext,
The lasses feat, an' cleanly neat,
Sweeter by far than Hybla's honied roses
An' cry till ye be hearse an' roupet,
These wild-wood flowers I've pu'd, to deck
When all around have sunk to sleep,
Between those hanging rocks, that shock yet please the soul.
Of grief, to last thee to my kiss again.
Where Scotia's kings of other years,
I hold it, Sir, my bounden duty,
Shake the red cloak, and poise the ready brand:
Thus in alternate uproar and sad peace,
Of aspect more sublime; that blessed mood,
Wi' bitter, dearthfu' wines to mell,
No arts could appease them, no arms could repel;
And shake him from thee; the vile strength he wields
A world for Woman, lovely, harmless thing!
Too oft remind her who and what enthrals,
Rider and horse,--friend,--foe,--in one red burial blent!
They've hang'd my braw John Highlandman.
As them wha like to taste the drappie
The vulgar take but little heed;
But bring a Scotsman frae his hill,
Niest time we meet, I'll wad a groat,
His had been quaffed too quickly, and he found
The shepherd in the hovel milks,
Thou shalt behold her, Hermes, thou alone,
Rise, Cupids! or we'll give the blue-bell pinch
Ca' them whare the heather growes,
She sleeps, and doubtless hoped to be forgiven.
With heads tucked in their wings now pine for day
As eve's shades from high mountain tops
Where now my Nancy's path may be!
The fount at which the panting Mind assuages
The flowery Spring leads sunny Summer,
Their doom, nor heed the suppliant's appeal?
Nae joy nor pleasure can she see;
O eloquent and famed Boccaccio!
Alike to screen the birdie's nest,
Than dog-like, wading at the heels of war,
Her name in story, and her long array
And thus reward the toils which to those summits led.
Though I forget the taste of earthly bliss,
There blush'd no summer eve but I would steer
And it is hushed--the fern leaves scarcely shake,
He stops the gap and keeps them all in bounds
How do you this blae eastlin wind,
Has clad a score i' their last claith,
The small birds rejoice in the green leaves returning,
I was a fisher once, upon this main,
Than the church links withal; and--though unwed,
And glide away in troops together
Was but a dust-spot in a lake: thy mind
How will Posterity the deed proclaim!
They could inhabit; the most curious
And seems to one in drowsiness half lost,
We reached the western world, a poor, devoted crew.
I fled three days--when lo! before me stood
She plucks the fruit unseen, she bathes unseen:
The maiden's chamber, silken, hush'd, and chaste;
Oh! Betty she'll be in a fright.
'Till skin in blypes cam haurlin'
With too much passion, will here stay and pity,
Farewell, my Bess! tho' thou'rt bereft
Be banish'd o'er the sea to France:
"At Kilve there was no weather-cock,
That flit ere you can point their place;
Lest aught unseen should lurk to thwart his speed:
Amang her nestlings sits the thrush;
To see her still, and singing so sweet lays;
Lay a lost thing upon her paly lip,
--But he laughed and danced up, What, old boy, are you there?
Where'er the surge may sweep, the tempest's breath prevail.
Trembling its closed eyes and sleeked wings
Dear Lord in Heaven! it was a joy,
Except where greenwood echoes rang
As she sat by the bishop's knee;
At this the shadow wept, melting away.
Shine from a sister valley;--and afar
Is like an infant's grave in size
Content am I, if heaven shall give
Never, perhaps, to greet old Scotland more.
And guide thy soul to mine even here,
Would play anither Charles the Twalt:
And all its aching joys are now no more,
Then let us clear away the choaking thorns
They wasted o'er a scorching flame
And how and why we know not, nor can trace
From their down-toppling nests; and bellowing herds
Ye hills, ye plains, ye forests and ye caves,
"Now tell me where is Madeline," said he,
But Mauritania's giant-shadows frown,
And so it proved.--The next succeeding May,
He taks the fiddler by the beard,
On steam's almighty tales he wondering looks
What could I do, unaided and unblest?
Is friendship, whence there ever issues forth
In tenderness, would I were whole in love!
Macedonia sends forth her invincible race;
In his sly, dry, sententious, proverb way;
Could aught of song declare my pains,
Ye ministers, come mount the pu'pit,
O that's the queen o' womankind,
And there she sits, until the moon
All lovely tales that we have heard or read:
And oft, while scratching through the briary woods
And kept his rosy terms in idle languishment.
Till on the level height their steps found ease:
every bramble-spear has its trembling ornament: till the wind gets
Immortal, though no more; though fallen, great!
Your hearts are just a standing pool,
To loose his pack an' wale a sang,
He felt the powerful, high behest,
He hosts and he hirples the weary day lang;
And plays about its fancy, till the stings
And air of visions, and the monstrous swell
Or even the piping cry of lips that brook
Ah, these were days her conscience viewed with pain,
Ægina lay--Piræus on the right,
And in the midst of this wide quietness
Nor morsel to my mouth that day did lift,
Shall yet redeem thee, and, all backward driven,
The wan moon is setting behind the white wave,
(Nature may have her whim as well as we,
Showered on his eyelids, brow, and mouth, as from an urn!
Precipitous: I have beneath my glance
Is there no hope from thee? This horrid spell
A long blue livery-coat has he,
And from night's prison strugglingly encroach,
Ye ken yoursels my heart right proud is--
Of ill--but chief, man's felon snare;
If he lies in the path, though a king's coming bye,
No sly man of business, contriving to snare--
And mounts and sings on flittering wings,
Harold, once more within the vortex, rolled
Blushed at the praise of their own loveliness--
O what a sigh she gave in finishing,
Her house sae bien, her curch sae clean,
And let long grass grow round the roots to keep them
Bonny and stout and brown, without a hat,
Nor calm domestic peace had ever deigned to taste.
And coost her duddies to the wark,
Her worship, but, devoted to her rite,
But the weary, weary warpin o't
While still her gaze on Porphyro would keep;
O Hermes! on this very night will be
"And two of us at Conway dwell,
Had eer been bent by Trouble's feet, and Love thy pillow made.
Now when ye're nickan down fu' canny
With new-born life! What shall I do? Where go,
A single recollection--not in vain
Rake them like Sodom and Gomorrah,
With yokes and buckets as she bounced along,
Nor ceased to burn till kingdoms were no more:
My voice is not a bellows unto ire.
Reader, dost value matchless worth?
The guide, the guardian of my heart, and soul
Regal his shape majestic, a vast shade
The Lord forgie me for lying, for lying,
Had zoned her through the night. There is no trace
Hell and its agonies seem hid below.
And his dark brow for very wrath is knit?
The languid sick; it cool'd their fever'd sleep,
For _love_, I heard, gave one an air
That faints into itself at evening hour:
In their affairs, requiring trusty hands.
And gave a roar, as if of earthly fire,
Yet never a breeze did breathe:
But pomp and power alone are Woman's care,
No brook is here, I feel the loss
Made a delighted way. Then dance, and song,
"A bonnie lass, ye kend her name,
Contented wi' little, and cantie wi' mair,
Your sister, she may close your feet,
The sweetest voice that lips contain,
There, Thou!--whose Love and Life together fled,
But, if ye come this gate again,
And 'tween the curtains peep'd, where, lo!--how fast she
Here's a health to ane I lo'e dear;
One moment now may give us more
Disguise ev'n tenderness, if thou art wise;
And the rich notes to each sensation fitting.
So, Sir, ye see 'twas nae daft vapour,
He neither must know who would serve the Vizier:
Wad gar you trow ye ne'er do wrang,
I sing his name, and nobler fame,
I've little to say, but only to pray,
When _love_ had thus my heart beguil'd
And all around it dipp'd luxuriously
True to the veriest slaves of Treachery:
An' whan we chasten'd him therefore,
If friends he had, he bade adieu to none.
O misery of hell! resistless, tame,
The boldest steer but where their ports invite--
But entrance found he nane, man:
But when the pony moved his legs,
In self-commitment, thus that meek unknown:
Not heard before by Gods or wondering men.
Come, draw a drap o' the best o't yet;
Or anxious calls, or close of trembling palms,
So many, and so many, and such glee?
Throughout my bondage." Thus discoursing, on
And, less luxuriant, smoother vales extend:
Forgets her empires with a just decay,
Soft breezes from the myrtle vale below;
Mere withered stalks and fading trees,
Left murmuring, what deepest thought can tell?
"Ah, woe is me! that I should fondly part
Grew a new heart, which at this moment plays
For now I'm grown sae cursed douce
The trumpets sound, the banners fly,
Of his right eye, as you may see:
As priest-rid cattle are, &c. &c.
As the shades of ev'ning close,
In the mole-hills and the bushes, and the clear brook fringed with rushes
Low in your wintry beds, ye flowers,
Round and round the seasons go:
The wedding-guest he beat his breast,
And your skulls are storehouses o' lead.
In most distressful mood (some inward pain
As grazing ox unworried in the meads;
But they shall be--shall be free!
Of years all winters,--war within themselves to wage:
Nae sage North, now, nor sager Sackville,
Poor Susan moans, poor Susan groans,
Angelo's--Alfieri's  bones--and his,
She has open'd the door, she has open'd it wide;
Some devil seize them in a hurry,
Of pleasure's temple. Round about were hung
Auld Ayr is just one lengthen'd tumbling sea--
An' there will be black-lippit Johnnie,
Wha last beside his chair shall fa',
The silvery setting of their mortal star.
Cruel! what traitor could thee hither bring?
Where looks inhuman dwelt on festering heaps!
Himself on wither'd leaves, even as though
Yet men will murder upon holy days:
The dew fell fresh, the sun rose mild,
Exclaim, How then, was Scylla quite forgot?
'Tis almost death to hear: O let me pour
They'll talk o' patronage and priests;
And dost thou ask what secret woe
His Maker's, spread around me, and suspend
Ere I sae dear pay for a saddle;
Which spring beneath her steps as Passion flies
Long, long, be pleased to spare;
Tak' tent how ye purchase a dram;
The tender azure  of the unruffled deep,
By Colin's cottage lies his game,
Shall the sons of Chimari, who never forgive
Its heavy pressure, and will press at least
To see oursels as others see us!
Wrecks of another world, whose ashes still are warm.
Is that a Temple where a God may dwell?
But since I'm here, I'll no neglect,
And every word she spake entic'd him on
"For, here are woods and green-hills warm;
And speakest now what's known of every tongue,
There's threesome reels, there's foursome reels,
In his coat as to rend it from collar to flap.
Grim vengeance lang ha's taen a nap,
Take thou the carlin's carcase aff,
Nor should I now, but that I've known you long;
Has lustre outshining the diamond to me:
Like naigs, an' nowt, an' a' that.
His books are laid, though good, in number small,
And when his pockets, chafing through the case,
That, in the merry months o' spring,
Wiped bye her soot-black hair with clenching fist,
And strait the Sun was fleck'd with bars
Their days insipid, dull, an' tasteless;
Where nested was an arbour, overwove
The long, warm, lightsome summer-day,
And wanton naigies nine or ten.
It caught his eye, he saw it plain--
There, watching high the least alarms,
And violets bathe in the weet o' the morn;
A wit as various,--gay, grave, sage, or wild,--
Buzz from their honied wings: and thou shouldst please
Wide sea, that one continuous murmur breeds
To helpen gather up the littered flowers
We've been owre lang unkenn'd to ither:
Is, that I pity thee; that on this day
Poor Tammy Gage, within a cage,
"An' his heart is rank poison,"
And the Promethean clay by thief endued,
He wanders as free as the winds of his mountains,
Ah, Vice! how soft are thy voluptuous ways!
And blushing for the freaks of melancholy.
Peopling it with affections; but he found
Glow-worms began to trim their starry lamps,
To merits, that had adoration won
We'll let her stand a year or twa,
And shut the chamber up, close, hush'd and still,
To say the least, four counties round
There commix'd with foulest stains
Enough their simple loveliness for me,
That whether doing, suffering, or forbearing,
The Nereids danc'd; the Syrens faintly sang;
Unless it did, though fearfully, espy
I feel I must have died with thee.
I kiss'd her owre and owre again,
O Pope, had I thy satire's darts
And with them shall I die; nor much it grieves
The Lord's cause ne'er got sic a twistle
And mix unbleeding with the boasted slain,
No merely slumberous phantasm, could unlace
She cast about a standard tree to find;
In themes of bloody fray, or gallant fight,
Came the amazement, that, absorb'd in it,
And, at that moment, felt my body dip
Now stand as tightly by your tack;
Are things to brood on with more ardency
Jockey's ta'en the parting kiss,
To tell Maria her Esopus' fate.
That in these days your praises should be sung
For tempting cuckoo-flowers and violet buds,
Though yo can do little skaith,
The bands and bliss o' mutual love,
While the joy that precedes the calm season of rest
From countless, unbeginning time
Is emptied of thine hoary majesty.
In solitude, where we are _least_ alone;
As restless children from the school released,
On blythe yule night when we were fou,
Ease frae toil, relief frae care:
There's monie waur been o' the race,
Such over-weening phantasies unsound,
The kirk an' state may join and tell--
Clad in rich dullness' comfortable fur;--
And subtler venom of the reptile crew,
Within the web of my existence, some
Where the hall of thy fathers a ruined heap lies.
Into the vallies green together went.
A deep and ancient stonepit full of trees;
O'er countries and kingdoms their fury prevail'd,
Where on one side are covert branches hung,
Now all was bustle, and the menial train
Among the winds at large--that all may hearken!
And all who see him say 'tis plain,
On whom we tread: For _this_ the conqueror rears
He's peevish and jealous of a' the young fellows:
Upon her crest she wore a wannish fire
In the old homestead rests the cottage cow;
That wondrous night: the great Pan-festival:
Awa wi' your witchcraft o' beauty's alarms,
Some with their faces muffled to the ear
He mutters stories to himself and lies
Existent happier in the fly and worm,--
And all the everlasting cataracts,
For simple Isabel is soon to be
And sing their pleasures, hopes, an' joys,
There's peace an' rest nae langer:
Nay, what are priests, those seeming godly wise men?
Two dusky forms dart thro' the midnight air,
But I will down yon river rove,
Aft has he doudl'd me up on his knee;
Whatever he shall wish, betide her weal or woe.
Is it for this the Spanish maid, aroused,
Guid faith, quo' she, I doubt you gar,
And I follow the Collier Laddie.
Lest he should view his vineyard desolate,
Here's him that's far awa, Willie,
Vain is his hope, whose stay and trust is
My heart, for fear, gaed sough for sough,
Let spear-grass and the spiteful thistle wage
What wouldst thou ere we all are laid on bier?"
In mingling concert with the rural sounds;
Kens the pleasure, feels the rapture,
My dear, I'll come and see thee;
Than be--I care not what. O meekest dove
The scented breezes round him blaw--
Rheum to kind eyes, a sting to human thought,
How have I wish'd for fortune's charms,
Long streams of light o'er dancing waves expand;
Clarens! sweet Clarens  birthplace of deep Love!
When some bright thought has darted through my brain:
Is welcome still; nor heedless will he flee
Let me some remnant, some memorial bear;
Thee, gentle Goddess of my pilgrimage,
Hath spread himself a couch, the Alps have reared a throne.
Instead of pines shall murmur in the wind:
A virgin purest lipp'd, yet in the lore
And sought a correspondent breast,
Trembling, I dow nocht but glow'r,
O, aid me with Thy help, Omnipotence Divine!
To note on hedgerow baulks, in moisture sprent,
A woman--tho' the phrase may seem uncivil--
Guilt, erring man, relenting view!
Thou pointest out the way, and straight 'tis won.
Of grasshoppers against the sun. She weeps,
The frog half fearful jumps across the path,
How that red rain hath made the harvest grow!
And come as ye were na comin' to me.
And owsen frae the furrow'd field
Folk maun do something for their bread,
Spreading imaginary pinions wide.
But knew him as his Worshipper no more,
And the blue sky, and in the mind of man,
His very hair, his golden tresses famed
My friends, when you were gone away.
"Yet you are seven; I pray you tell
And hastens to the chair to get the place;
This cradle of my glory, this soft clime,
Swift as the gos  drives on the wheeling hare;
Are lovers as faithful, and maidens as fair:
For clothes, for warmth, for food, and fire;
Which they can do between them.
But, in embalmed darkness, guess each sweet
He came and smiled and stole it then.
"You run about, my little maid,
An' rouse them up to strong conviction,
And burning with high Hope, shall moulder cold and low.
Since Time hath reft whate'er my soul enjoyed,
Or foaming strang, wi' hasty stens,
No! loudly echoed times innumerable.
An' her kind stars hae airted till her
Yet in his lineaments ye cannot trace,
Of golden lands. Leoni's younger brother
Croaks music in my native field.
Resolv'd, she took with her an aged nurse,
Whose breast of waters broadly swells
Lausanne! and Ferney! ye have been the abodes
Into its airy channels with so subtle,
Ye Scots, wha wish auld Scotland well,
But the sap lasts,--and still the seed we find
And Wallace Tow'r  had sworn the fact was true:
Oft prowling, ensanguin'd the Tweed's silver flood:
Daily, I pluck sweet flowerets from their bed,
Twa span-lang, wee, unchristen'd bairns;
Left sudden by a dallying breath of air,
Tho' I maun say't, I doubt ye flatter,
Quickly on this feast-night: by the tambour frame
Their bright, bright eyes, their eyes both bright and full,
Yet with as sweet a softness as might be
The breeze I see is in the tree;
"Oh God forbid!" poor Susan cries.
Nor solely dare encounter hostile rage,
But for thy friends, and they are mony,
Beamless and pale and round, as if the moon,
Wha glaum'd at kingdoms three, man.
An' may a bard no crack his jest
And that fell cur ca'd Common Sense,
Faints into sleep, with many a dying tone
Muffling to death the pathos with his wings;
But come, your hand, my careless brither,
Though the sedge is withered from the Lake
Our auld guidman delights to view
By a cavern wind unto a forest old;
That ancient Beadsman heard the prelude soft;
And hardened high-lows clenched with nails around,
Did Susan rise up from her bed,
A woman's sigh alone and in distress?
One hair of thine: see how I weep and sigh,
How gladly would I change for thine.
The birdies flit on wanton wing.
And sung of Phoebe all the day.
Say, is her voice more feeble than of yore,
The water, like a witch's oils,
A knife, a father's throat had mangled,
When you two little ones would stand at eve
That hobbles up the steep rough road?
Whether to silver grots, or giant range
The white-nosed bee that bores its little hole
Upon the banks they eas'd-their shanks,
Seal'd on her silk-saft faulds to rest,
It flung the blood into my head,
A long low distant murmur of dread sound,
An' wilfu' folk maun hae their will;
Hands that took--but never gave.
The music of these summer birds
Droops with a diamond at its head,
Sweet are the pleasures that to verse belong,
Or, in the senate thunder out my numbers
How Earth may pierce to Heaven, yet leave vain man below.
As skilled in noise and sounds as Hodge himself;
It was no dream; or say a dream it was,
Swelling pity smoor'd his wrath;
Poor child of Doubt and Death, whose hope is built on reeds.
Share with immortal transports? could thine art
And starts the rapture of thine eye
So fond, so beauteous was his bed-fellow,
Humming of future things, that burn the mind
That e'er ye brak Diana's pales,
Of sudden exaltation: but, "Alas!
Why is outlandish stuff sae meikle courted?
The sky is blue, the fields in view,
Its beams against the zodiac-lion cast,
Danae's Son, before Jove newly bow'd,
But when divinity comes cross me
The roaring water-fall she hears,
Wi' weel-spread looves, and lang wry faces;
Have flung a desolate cloud o'er Venice' lovely walls.
Parent of rivers, which flow gushingly,
The day appear'd, and all the gossip rout.
Whose hand, whose essence, what divinity
Nay, Bobby's mouth may be open'd yet
Grant me, indulgent Heav'n, that I may live
An' strive, wi' a' your wit and lear,
In wood and wild, ye warbling throng,
Love, thou hast sorrows, and sair hae I proved;
At every turn Morena's dusky height
A few of them have ever been the food
Thou wast not born for death, immortal Bird!
I am no happy shepherd of the dell
"But tell me, tell me! speak again,
Crept, gently-crusting, o'er the glittering stream.--
That drive afield with carts and ploughs?
Though death-struck, still his feeble frame he rears;
My silent thoughts are echoing from these shells;
She sent the gentle sleep from heaven
Or turn the pole like any arrow;
Doth her resign; and where her tender hands
A sudden glow comes on them, nought they see
The incense went to her own starry dwelling.
As say these sages, health perpetual
Hard is his heart whom charms may not enslave;
Life's social haunts and pleasures I resign,
What a calm round of hours shall make my days.
I'm better pleas'd to make one more,
A bud which snares his fancy: lo! but now
She clos'd the door, she panted, all akin
Naked and sabre-like against my heart.
Wi' common lords ye shanna mingle,
More mighty spots may rise--more glaring shine,
Thou grim king of terrors, thou life's gloomy foe!
Of thy wide heaven; yet, to my ardent prayer,
On forest-fruits, and never, never go
And then a mossy spire, with ivy crown,
Behind yon hills, where Lugar flows,
So every eve, nay every spendthrift hour
My ploughman he comes hame at e'en,
"O, bid him save their harmless lives
And chaunt love's old and idle tune,
She's sweeter than the morning dawn
Fast by an ingle bleezing finely,
Has stained and blighted every bough;
Too gentle Hermes, hast thou found the maid?"
A stream went voiceless by, still deadened more
My very heart and saul are quakin',
I must needs say, comparisons are odd.
Rock'd me to patience. Now, thank gentle heaven!
My tenderest squeeze is but a giant's clutch.
And cows were drinking at the water's edge,
In which the Zephyr breathes the loudest song,
And for ever disowns thee, her Willy.
Your locks were like the raven,
The pray'r still, you share still,
Alas! my roupet Muse is hearse!
And still the housewife's eye they cheat,
But give me real, sterling wit,
And thorns of life; forgetting the great end
These are the living pleasures of the bard:
But not a moment can he there insure them,
And heavy though it clanked not; worn with pain,
That woodland Hyacinthus could escape
May be confounded and abash'd withal,
To wander forth, with me to mourn
Such is Bumtagg, whose history I resign,
And blood burnt round my heart.
Upon their bucklers for a winding sheet--
To meddle wi' mischief a-brewing;
And galleries, where my steps seem echoes strangely loud.
Beneath these battlements, within those walls,
Yet he gives maidens many a burning cheek;
Haunt us till they become a cheering light
So mus'd awhile, entoil'd in woofed phantasies.
So, till morrow-morning's come,
Huge sea-marks; vanward swelling in array,
Where's the cheek that doth not fade,
Away I wander'd--all the pleasant hues
For the first time through many anguish'd days,
Now, wha this tale o' truth shall read,
Or give me to the air, or let me die!
Was quick to learn and wise to know,
Since the days of our Prophet the Crescent ne'er saw
Infant' graves are steps of angels, where
And never absent couzen, black as coal,
A shadow of man's ravage, save his own,
In costly sheen and gaudy cloak arrayed.
Coila's fair Rachel's care to-day,
Thus merrily the little noisy troop
So said he one fair morning, and all day
Stoop, Hermes, let me breathe upon thy brow,
Its clear depth yields of their far height and hue:
Fain, fain would I my griefs impart,
Ye gallants bright, I red ye right,
The Whigs come on like Ocean's roar,
I'se gang wi' you, my shepherd lad,
And then, towards me, like a very maid,
An' ye have laid nae tax on misses;
A very Red Cross Knight--a stout Leander--
Keen contest and destruction near allied,
To doubtful conflict, certain slaughter bring:
The land of shadows wilt thou trace,
A melancholy story, far too true;
The blissful day we twa did meet,
Nay, more--there is danger in touching;
The Old Man's clench; the long envenomed chain
And sock or buskin skelp alang,
While subtile Litigation's pliant tongue
Until it came to some unfooted plains
The soaring hern the fountains;
In pale and silver silence they remain'd,
Memory, though slow, returned with strength; and thence
A blink o' rest's a sweet enjoyment.
By conquering beauty's sovereign law;
Awake! resound thy latest lay--
His limbs are cast in beauty's mould,
At my right han' assigned your seat
And sic a night he taks the road in
Pouring a constant bulk, uncertain where.
Would it were worthier! but I am not now
And breath'd himself: then from the closet crept,
Black polish'd porticos of awful shade,
In sowing time ne'er would I dibble take,
The heap that's like an infant's grave,
His bright feet touch'd, and there he stay'd to view
With nought of Hope left--but with less of gloom;
O bright-eyed Hope, my morbid fancy cheer;
Of then destruction _is_; and now, alas!
Sae I subscribe myself in haste,
But stray amang the heather-bells,
Scarce ane has tried the shepherd-sang
And trouts be-dropp'd wi' crimson hail,
Lycius, perplex'd at words so blind and blank,
Spurning the clay-cold bonds which round our being cling.
Circling about her waist, and striving how
Wait awhile and these are dead--
And revel'd in a chat that ceased not
From ev'ry joy and pleasure torn,
Like boys that run behind the loaded wain
Should madly follow that bright path of light
All nature owns with one accord
And in these regions many a venom'd dart
Paint Scotland greetin' owre her thrizzle,
All coiled into itself and round, as sleeps the snake.
Nae ferlie 'tis tho' fickle she prove,
And waft them in th' infernal wherry,
On a bank of flowers, in a summer day,
And this is their best cure! uncomforted
I lay, where with his drowsy mates, the cock
With the wreath'd trellis of a working brain,
Nor weep a single tear for thee:
As dear and near my heart I set thee
And Christ would take no pity on
And in the cottage gangs with dread,
She traced the pastures up and down
The blackguard laughs and hurries on the fray.
Beneath the shadow of that ancient mount,
And doubly welcome be the spring,
Through one small window, where a looking-glass
Where is thy place of blissful rest?
My soul; that I may dare, in wayfaring,
To zones though more and more remote,
Thou spar'st the flowers in thy mazy dance?
*       *       *       *       *
Of the aspiring boy; who as he led
With hushing finger, how he means to load
When Abel haply wreathed with may
Has dried up realms to deserts:--not so thou,
But from the chambers came the mingling din,
Auld Scotland wants nae stinking ware
At which that dark-eyed stranger stood elate
But lo! the Dome--the vast and wondrous Dome,
The tyrant, in his lawless power deterred,
A hermit young, I'll live in mossy cave,
I thought that I had died in sleep,
And the bird's forgot his song:
Aft thee an' I, in aught hours gaun,
And ilka bird sang o' its luve,
The simmer to nature, my Willie to me.
Their views enlarg'd, their liberal mind,
When summer cometh in her hottest hours.
Aft hae I rov'd by bonnie Doon,
Who glut their vile unsatiated maws
And the which book ye know I ever kept
He leans upon his hand--his manly brow
Forth from a rugged arch, in the dusk below,
Till ye forget ye're auld an' gatty,
The body and I pull'd at one rope,
And vow'd that she should be detected,
As ne'er poor sinner was abroad in.
Death fell a weeping in his charnel-house.
And win the key-stane  of the brig;
And thou'rt the angel that never can alter--
Still closer knit in friendship's ties
Dark Guadiana rolls his power along
The moon's in heaven, as Betty sees,
And pierc'd my darling's heart;
Still does he mark it with triumphant boast,
Propitious Powers screen'd the young flowers,
The glorious sun began to rise,
Where first I own'd that virgin-love
O had my fate been Greenland snows,
An' ay he vows he'll be my ain,
And race along with hellish flight,
Or tear their name defiled from Slavery's mournful page.
Auld Hornie did the Laigh Kirk watch,
Music arose with its voluptuous swell,
A linnet starting all about the bushes:
Thou watchest the last oozings hours by hours.
Thought neighbour's service better to begin.
And bar the doors wi' driving snaw,
"St. Agnes! Ah! it is St. Agnes' Eve--
He started forward with a shout,
And safely view thy ripening beauties shine;
Crowning its lawny crest with amber flame,
They'll a' be trench'd wi' mony a sheugh
Thro' winters cauld, or simmer's heat;
Down, down, uncertain to what pleasant doom,
Where fed the herds of Pan: ay great his gains
The Tay, meand'ring sweet in infant pride,
We'll to the breathing woodbine bower
He knows a lawless law that claims no kin
A higher summons:--still didst thou betake
So happy was he, not the aerial blowing
Of absence, these steep woods and lofty cliffs,
Nor hated harmless mirth, however rude:
May tyrants and tyranny tine in the mist,
For chiefs like ours in vain may laurels bloom!
How graceless Ham  leugh at his dad,
For dear to me, as light and life,
Whene'er I venture on the stream of rhyme;
When jumping time away on old Crossberry Way,
Or else I wad kill him wi' sorrow;
Nor e'er will the notes from their tenderness change;
Yet, for him there's refreshment even in toil;
The moon was full and shining clearly,
Towers like an ocean-cliff, and whence he seeth
Diversely ting'd with rose and amethyst,
And one in jacket fringed with red
Was warm'd luxuriously by divine Mozart;
Recall its virtues back, and vanquish Time and Fate?
Heavens! how desperately do I adore
And you farewell! whose merits claim,
Ye'll find me in a better tune;
Auld comrade dear, and brither sinner,
Fond Hope of many nations, art thou dead?
And turning as the matter mends,
We have the honour to belong to you!
E'en let her take her will, jo:
Swart planet in the universe of deeds!
Still scooping up the water with my fingers,
"O, help, master, help, or she'll ruin us a',
Thro' a' our lasses he did rove,
I'll grunt a real gospel groan:
Sure I have heard those vestments sweeping o'er
Behind the door, behind the door;
The bane of all that dread the devil.
The nest was full of eggs and round--
It was a' for our rightfu' king,
Content his helpmate to the day's employ
They shine in fields, or waste grounds near the town.
No parallel, thy greatness to presage.
The passion poesy, glories infinite,
The black disguise, the warning whistle shrill,
Hid near the arched brig under many a stone
Keeping a silence round a sleeping maid;
Frozen in that old tale Arabian.
They flatter, she says, to deceive me,
True hearted was he, the sad swain o' the Yarrow,
Where eer I saw a wild flower lie
And Fancy hover o'er thy bloodless bier,
But still he holds the wedding-guest--
Just as the sun was from the east uprising;
And fling their thunder-bolts from hand to hand,
Sae black and bare, sae black and bare,
To that which is immediate, and require
The look with which they look'd on me,
And from its immortality, look forth
"Some, bounded to a district-space,
With knowledge so vast, and with judgment so strong,
As she had heard old dames full many times declare.
And when at last her time drew near,
Upon his arm he braces Pallas' shield,
Transported I was with my sodger laddie.
Had not a friend. So being left alone,
Soft went the music the soft air along,
Of all these things around us." He did so,
And far into the moonlight dale;
Stretched on his straw he lays himself to sleep,
But blithe's the blink o' Robie's e'e,
'Twas then I prov'd false to my sodger laddie.
Thyself by thine adorer, what befel?
'Tis well nigh past man's search their hearts to see;
Had charms for him; and here he loved to sit,
Perhaps the self-same song that found a path
Thea, I feel thee ere I see thy face;
The level chambers, ready with their pride,
Nae doubt but ye may get a sight!
Where no man went; and if from shepherd's keep
'Twas where the birch and sounding thong are ply'd,
When he doth lighten up the golden reins,
While virgin Spring, by Eden's flood,
I look'd--'twas Scylla! Cursed, cursed Circe!
No! gentle love, that timid dream,
Thy name with Alfred's, and the great of yore
Yet oft the sport of all the ills of life;
To search it inwards; whence far off appear'd,
Wha gae the Whigs the power o't.
A straying from his toil? Hot Egypt's pest
Deep in heart-wrung tears I'll pledge thee,
To wild uncertainty and shadows grim.
Saw two fair creatures, couched side by side
Welcome now simmer, and welcome my Willie,
Bold stems of heroes, here and there,
And though he prayed, he never loved to pray
And said, "Alas! ye've ruin'd me."
From rushes green, and brakes, and cowslip'd lawns,
He who surpasses or subdues mankind,
To plague you with this draunting drivel,
And so the babe grew up a pretty boy,
And calls the past a dull dark age of fools.
I glowr'd as eerie's I'd been dusht
While briers an' woodbines budding green,
His patient thought, had now begun to thaw,
The ill-thief blaw the heron south!
Aye, such a breathless honey-feel of bliss
But, heavens! how he fell a swearin'.
And Fancy's visions undeceive us;
But, word an' blow, North, Fox, and Co.,
Which hunger forces birds to eat:
And hides the green hill in an April shroud;
Detested, shunn'd, by saunt an' sinner,
Over eclipsing eyes: and at the last
Which gathers shadow--substance--life, and all
The green-swathed grasshopper, on treble pipe,
In this world's ways they gain,
Not to companion thee, and sigh away
That's a' the learning I desire;
This murky phantasm! thou contented seem'st
By virtue's holiest powers attended.
Of mighty shadows, whose dim forms despond
Ay free, aff han' your story tell,
Fair Greece! sad relic of departed Worth!
Opening their golden caskets to the sun,
Of music's kiss impregnates the free winds,
And wooed her like a lover by my lonely side to stay;
And O, to be lying beyond thee;
Heroes have trod this spot--'tis on their dust ye tread.
A name of blood from that day's sanguine rain;
His manly leg with garter tangle bound.
A thousand handicraftsmen wore the mask
O, if I were happy, where happy I hae been,
Has my own soul conspired: so my story
Beneath, the distant Torrent's rushing sound
And turn, sole-thoughted, to one Lady there,
But left behind her ain gray tail:
Untroubling and untroubled where I lie;
And, as the twilight was begun,
There keen indignation shall dart on her prey,
May plunge an' plunge the kirn in vain:
And mine were nothing, had I such to give;
And boyhood's pleasing haunt like a blossom in the blast
The while the change was easily perceived,
Gin ye'll leave your Collier Laddie.
In other lands, where he was doomed to go:
With lily shells, and pebbles milky white,
Of thy broidered, floating vest
And now that Johnny is just going,
Sure I had drunken in my dreams
And often, when I sit me down to rhyme,
The trout within yon wimpling burn
So ere he could work--though he'd lost the whole day--
Whose eyelids curtain'd up their jewels dim,
Your thrifty old mother has scarce such another
'Till all our minds for ever flow,
By a fore-knowledge of unslumbrous night!
The gander with his scarlet nose
Their waefu' fate what need I tell,
By heaven and earth I love thee!
And every tongue thro' utter drouth
We fall by course of Nature's law, not force
Nell's heart, was dancin' at the view,
To take in draughts of life from the gold fount
She sunk, abandon'd to the wildest woe.
But gie me your wife, man, for her I must have,
Of manhood but sum' is your share,
Yet there I've wandered by thy vaunted rill;
Think, wicked sinner, wha ye're skaithing,
Well, honest John, how fare you now at home?
Thus have I thought; and days on days have flown
Their marble pillars overswelling,
The little fate allows, they share as soon,
Began to tear his scroll in pieces small,
It wad for ev'ry ane be better,
And when a transient breeze swept o'er the wave,
Or cutty-sarks run in your mind,
Redoubted Staig  who set at nought
But woe is me, I am but as a child
Love, thou hast pleasures, and deep hae I loved;
She wrapp'd it up; and for its tomb did choose
And tends them closely till it's time for home.
He row'd me sweetly in his plaid,
His thoughts to heav'n on high,
Comes in between to make us part,
And that warm-hearted Shakspeare sent to meet him
And pray'd for grace wi' ruefu' face,
I hear her in the tunefu' birds,
Who in her rough imperfect line,
A sweeping, kindling, bauld strathspey--
Once fondly lov'd and still remember'd dear;
Made gloom of all her frecklings, streaks and bars,
Little trotty wagtail, he waddled in the mud,
The turkeys wade the close to catch the bees
Fill'd fou o' lowin' brunstane,
The friend of Tully: as my bark did skim
The warld's wealth and grandeur:
It comes to cool my babe and me.
Brews good ale at shore o' Bucky;
We're all getting weak, that's the end of the joke.
Doth bead with dressing rich to see,
A steady, sturdy, staunch believer.
Thou couldst rejoice to see my hopeless stream
At noon the fisher seeks the glen,
No more beneath soft Eve's consenting star
On one side is a field of drooping oats,
And from his fellow Bacchanals would flee;
If from society we learn to live,
Scotland, my auld, respected mither!
Long didst thou sit alone in northern grot,
Then up gat fechtin' Jamie Fleck,
I'll gather some by spells, and incantation.
On forked lightning, to the deepest deep,
And how she lov'd him too, each unconfines
And let his spirit, like a demon-mole,
An oath, and through the serpent's ears it ran
By this time she's not quite so flurried;
And having done it, took his dark blue cloak
The rain flew bouncing from her breast
Which spurning Contempt shall redeem from his ire.
And Lycius' arms were empty of delight,
Gie body strength, then I'll ne'er start
Such was my Chloris' bonnie face,
And had been glorious in another day:
Losh, man! hae mercy wi' your natch,
He might have given the moral a fresh frown,
An' Mallie, nae doubt, took the drunt,
About each youthful heart,--with stifled cries,
Wha kent fu' weel to cleek the sterling,
Torn Ocean's roar, but thy soft murmuring
That good to bad should change, and I should be
My goose-quill too rude is to tell all your goodness
Had we never lov'd sae blindly,
And love a kinder--that's your grand specific.
Yet whose parts and acquirements seem mere lucky hits;
With, "God forbid it should be true!"
And in the blue-clue  throws then,
I rear'd my head, and look'd for Phœbus' daughter.
Thy lips I feel them, baby! they
If sae, thy han' maun e'en be borne
Moreover, through the dancing poppies stole
And how did earth his worth return?
An Iris  sits, amidst the infernal surge,
Fledge the wild-ridged mountains steep by steep;
And fertilise the field that each pretends to gain.
Her falt'ring hand upon the balustrade,
After the full completion of fair day,--
Rattling away in printless tracks,
Light was my sleep; my days in transport roll'd:
As if the vanward clouds of evil days
Where'er I gaed, where'er I rade,
Then sore harass'd, and tir'd at last,
What marvel then, at times, if they mistook their prey?
In this eternal Ark of worship undefiled.
See yonder rose-bud, rich in dew,
Unconscious of the passing troop,--
To loose the door its fastening pin,
O let me hear thee speak, for Cupid's sake!
He rests at ease beneath some pleasant weed.
On osier twigs that form a mast--
"Hark! 'tis an elfin-storm from faery land,
While coofs on countless thousands rant,
And singe away the swollen clouds of Jove,
I mark him climb above the trees
Resembling, 'mid the torture of the scene,
To tunes forgotten--out of memory:
His early song against yon breezy sky,
Can match the lads o' Galla Water.
The sober laverock, warbling wild,
That in the new-leaved thorns of spring
They rush'd and push'd, and blude outgush'd,
And thou, the Muses' seat, art now their grave,
Damnation then would be our fate,
The Latmian listen'd, but he heard no more,
His features:--Lycius! wherefore did you blind
We have had our reward--and it is here,--
Haunters of cavern, lake, and waterfall,
Draw your choicest influence down.
Coffins stood round, like open presses;
Full fain it would delay me!--My dear Babe,
Give energy to life; and soothe his latest breath,
For pity's sake, sweet bird, nae mair!
And so long absence from thee doth bereave
One ringlet in the dust--nor hath it caught
And full of many wonders of the spheres:
Yet, Freedom! yet thy banner, torn, but flying,
An' bake them up in brunstane pies
Like one that hath been seven days drown'd
From this time forth Confusion:
And with these airs come forms of elegance
Such is thy name  with this my verse entwined;
Half seeing visions that might have dismay'd
The ne'er a bit they're ill to poor folk.
Far dearer than the torrid plains
Of conscience bids me be more calm awhile.
But let me think away those times of woe:
Sat gray-hair'd Saturn, quiet as a stone,
For strong and without pain I lay,
With her once natural charities. But they,
A fit  abode wherein appear enshrined
Plump infant laughers mimicking the coil
And I must taste the blossoms that unfold
The more in this you look for bliss,
The bondsman's peace, who sighs for all he lost,
A pretty boy, but most unteachable--
A title, and the only one I claim,
But if he's forgotten his faithfulest Nannie,
Soon will his legions sweep through these their way;
They skim the muirs an' dizzy crags
O for some rank, mercurial rozet,
Compar'd with these, Italian trills are tame;
Chattering at a neighbour's house,
Walls--palaces--half-cities, have been reared;
Where through some sucking pool I will be hurl'd
The spring is come, and birds are building nests;
That, with the freshness wearing out before
A hand was at my shoulder to compel
Poor Girl! put on thy stifling widow's weed,
And like to you, on Sundays often strolled
But yielded back his conquests:--he was more
And mortal foot hath ne'er or rarely been;
Just so man's boasted strength and power
Even now, while Saturn, rous'd from icy trance,
But where is he, the Pilgrim of my Song,
And yet I am, and live with shadows tost
As Venus looking sideways in alarm.
We'll house about till Daddie Care
Cheated by shadowy wooer from the clouds,
To see such lovely eyes in swimming search
She's gien me monie a jirt an' fleg,
Are theirs! One breast laid open were a school
An' shortly after she was done,
As showers at night wash out the steps of day.
'Twas Caledonia's trophied shield I view'd:
And awe slaves' murmurs with a frown,
And it was fit that thence I took
To divine powers: from his hand full fain
Unseen before by Gods or wondering men,
If subtle poniards, wrapt beneath the cloke,
Thermopylæ its heroes--not yet dead,
Her thirst of knowledge, quaffing there her fill,
Farewell old Coila's hills and dales,
Why stand we here? Adieu, ye tender pair!
And she held o'er the moors to spin;
From the south-west stained its encroaching track,
He roves, half indolent and self-employed,
At baking, roasting, frying, boiling;
Her orisons for thee, and o'er thy head
Now bank an' brae are claith'd in green,
Were often deafed to silence with her song.
And blest be the day I did it again.
All pain but pity: thus the lone voice spake:
Swiftly, swiftly flew the ship,
When a' the lave gae to their play,
Melt to calm twilight, they feel overcast
One hand she press'd upon that aching spot
(And blissful is he who such happiness finds,)
Sav'd from the shores of darkness, when the waves
Is bitterer still, as charm by charm unwinds
That evermore his teeth they chatter,
That clarty barm should stain my laurels;
O'er which the mind may hover till it dozes;
But my poor mistress went distract and mad,
Wi' favors secret, sweet, and precious;
Past the heath and up the hill;
And one will teach a tame dove how it best
As lately Fenwick, sair forfairn,
Drows'd with the fume of poppies, while thy hook
Like one revived, upon his neck I wept,
Such conduct neither spirit, wit, nor manners.
Pluto! if this be Hell I look upon,
I scorn not the peasant, tho' ever so low;
Beyond the fitting medium of desire;
She gave her fair hands to him, and behold,
While pitiless the tempest wild
Such names without a capital to spell.
The gentleman in word and deed,
Your soul in mine, and labyrinth you there
And thunders rend the howling air,
Have pinnacled in clouds their snowy scalps,
I sat, but neither heard or saw:
Faith, we'se hae fine remarkin'!"
Shut her pure sorrow drops with glad exclaim,
With a new colour as it gasps away--
Or thrice my palate moisten: but when I mark
An' rin her whittle to the hilt,
Till the old clock, that strikes unseen
And clos'd for ay the sparkling glance
The langest thong, the fiercest growler,
All tenantless, save to the crannying Wind,
A field flower grown in all her days
"The London court set light by me--
Starts dancing to his shadow on the wall,
He comes and hears--they let the strongest loose.
Through many a dusky gallery, they gain
With double joy wert _thou_ with me.
Beholds the Rainbow of her future years,
Into a whirlpool. Vanish into air,
Of wind and waters: 'tis past human wit
To meet us many a time." Next Cynthia bright
The Morn the marshalling in arms,--the Day
He wales a portion with judicious care;
And dropp'd down, like a stone!
Upon the same foundation, and renew
None shall know where I'm gone.
Canst thou break his faithfu' heart?
Four lily stalks did their white honours wed
Ye who shall marvel when you hear her tale,
Like Esop's lion, Burns says, sore I feel
Free from the smallest pebble-head of doubt
Pray for his gallant Spirit's bright repose;--
Who loves, raves --'tis youth's frenzy--but the cure
Weel pleas'd to think her bairn's respected like the lave.
Oh! I am come to the low countrie,
With thee as a dear sister. Thou alone,
And thus they run the meadows' bloom to waste,
Or ripe October's faded marigolds,
While in the moment of their weary pause,
And first, as thou wast not the first of powers,
Here's a health to ane I lo'e dear;
Ten thousand fleets sweep over thee in vain;
It flash'd, that Circe might find some relief--
The day-light dawn'd--they dropp'd their arms,
Were with his heart--and that was far away;
He softly creeps--'Tis Goody Blake,
Why linger at the yawning tomb so long?
Onward he flies, nor fixed as yet the goal
What verse can sing, what prose narrate,
Run till I tire.--And so to cheat her still.
Is th' wish o' mony mae than me;
Here's a health to them that's awa,
And flowers, and wreaths, and ready myrtle crowns
My ear is open like a greedy shark,
Crows and pigeons all were strangers as oer my head they flew.
She counts the eggs she cannot reach
Till my last weary sand was run;
There's nought but care on ev'ry han',
That followed labour in the field
Upon the time with feverish unrest--
O it has ruffled every spirit there,
The image of Eternity-the throne
How much, how dear, I love thee.
In such a place as this. O do not curse,
And his hair has a natural buckle an' a'.
When up they gat, and shook their lugs,
Though but a dog he'd have his love to spare
The trampler of her vineyards; in vain, years
As deep-recoiling surges foam below,
To you the dotard has a deal to say,
That till full fifty yards were gone,
Heart-achings, sighs, and grief-wrung tears,
To Empress Dian, for a hunting spear;
For Britain's guid his saul indentin'--
My Father dared his greedy wish gainsay;
These plots of cottage-ground, these orchard-tufts,
O mirk, mirk is this midnight hour,
What airs in dress an' gait wad lea'e us,
Immortal waves that saw Lepanto's fight!
There is no lightning, no authentic dew
For Britain's guid!--for her destruction
And there will Kempleton's birkie,
Could she not live who life eternal gave?
His blood-red tresses deepening in the Sun,
And och! o'er aft thy joes hae starv'd
Or frugal nature grudge thee one?
The marble column's yet unshaken base;
And frequent turn to linger as you go,
Time's creeping shall the dreary space fulfil:_
Thence mystic knots mak great abuse
Then Thea spread abroad her trembling arms
And what? can he avouch, or answer what he claimed?
Thy coach of hackney, whiskey,  one-horse chair,
Upon the path--when up the songs begin,
They cut away no formless monster's head,
The like has been that you may wear
Behold the Imperial Mount! 'tis thus the Mighty falls.
Shouted the new born god; "Follow, and pay
Knights, ladies, praying in dumb orat'ries,
And when they meet the bishop's cloak,
Then came a conquering earth-thunder, and rumbled
Though to the last, in verge of our decay,
I gazed awhile, and felt as light, and free
Curst Common-Sense, that imp o' hell,
Their doming curtains, high, magnificent,
Sings whistle owre the lave o't
Threatening soft showers again,
Hast thou a trumpet rich melodies blowing?
To its old channel, or a swollen tide
Poetic ardours in my bosom swell,
Rubbing their sleepy eyes with lazy wrists,
Some mourning words, which in our feeble tongue
When lyart leaves bestrow the yird,
Ye wha were ne'er by lairds respeckit,
Awhile forgetful of all beauty save
--It grows the cant term of enslaving tools
But Maggie stood right sair astonish'd,
Of colours, wings, and bursts of spangly light;
Ran mountains--high before the howling blaft.
Let me not see our country's honour fade:
We miscal grief, bale, sorrow, heartbreak, woe,
There, oft would he bring from his soft sighing lute
In Arno's dome of Art's most princely shrine,
Her shadow fell upon his breast, and charm'd
An' she has twa sparkling roguish een.
The Doctor, looking somewhat grim,
Like one who once had wings.--O why should I
Deeply she blushes on her morn's employ,
Which starry Uranus with finger bright
Like the small spinner's tapestry;
Tried through the pales to get the tempting flowers,
For still th' important end of life
And all expected such a rosy face
Love blinks, Wit slaps, an' social Mirth
Thoughts dare not speak but in the eyes,
And far _beneath_ the Earth and Ocean spread,
Are closing in the west; or that soft humming
I bow'd fu' low unto this maid,
Wha struts, and stares, and a' that;
Would have eat her dear lord, on a slender pretence,
In weeds of woe that frantic beat her breast,
Now haud you there! for faith ye've said enough,
And a few Persian mutes, who that same year
With one fair Spirit for my minister,
We seemed still more and more to prize each other:
There tainted mutton wastes upon the coals,
My river-lily bud! one human kiss!
And wherefore slaughtered? wherefore, but because
But hear no murmuring: it flows silently
A king can make a belted knight,
Wi' a' their bastards on their back!
She rises crescented!" He looks, 'tis she,
And then at last, from three to two;
Ae smile o' her wad banish care,
And flew at Tam wi' furious ettle;
But spent his days in riot most uncouth,
An' legs, an' arms, an' heads will sned,
Tossing about on Neptune's restless ways,
A sharer in thy fierce and far delight,--
And the sad Goddess weeping at his feet:
And many a lesser torrent scuds,
The boy drives on and fancies echo lives,
Let other heroes boast their scars,
For our sincere, tho' haply weak endeavours,
Muirhead,  wha's as gude as he's true;
a little brisker, and then all is shaken off, and all the shining
So may old Scotia's darling hope,
When my poor heart was strange to men,
Had taken from the stars its pleasant veil,
So wide was Neptune's hall: and as the blue
That you first taught me all the sweets of song:
Would he forget those beings, to whose minds,
And held within their urn one mind--one heart--one dust.
Have yielded to the stranger: empty halls,
Glory, is when the myrtle wreathes a Sword,
His evening faggot, and with every stride
Which on a wild secluded scene impress
Away from my own bosom: I have left
Her daddie forbad, her minnie forbad;
Now simmer blinks on flowery braes,
Rob, stowlins, prie'd her bonie mou',
For what she ails they cannot guess.
Must surely be self-doomed or he will rue it:
Upon these living flowers. Here is wine,
I'll leave at once her races and her song;
My heart is touched to think that men like these,
To make a coronal; and round him grew
Rich music breathes in summer's every sound;
He gat hemp-seed,  I mind it weel,
'Tis an old lesson--Time approves it true,
Come, screw the pegs, wi' tunefu' cheep,
In her armour of glances, and blushes, and sighs?
The Childe departed from his father's hall:
That day he wore a riding-coat,
And now, O winged Chieftain! them hast sent
With stern-resolv'd, despairing eye,
And Joy, whose hand is ever at his lips
The lover's raptur'd joys or bleeding cares;
The freshness of the space of heaven above,
A gust of wind sterte up behind
A gleib o' lan', a claut o' gear,
Now lost, save what we find on remnants huge
And GOD bless young Dunaskin's laird,
"O may I never see another night,
'Twas guilty sinners that he meant,
And compass vile: so that ye taught a school
A heart that warmly seems to feel;
An awfu' scythe, out-owre ae shouther,
So deep is their vermilion dye.
Of happy times, when all he had endur'd
'Till echo answer frae her cave
An' she has twa sparkling roguish een
In some sma' points, altho' not a';
The snellest blast, at mirkest hours,
Of her dead Doges are declined to dust;
He'll screed you aff Effectual calling,
And took them all to bed at night
The bees, rejoicing o'er their summer toils,
Upon her aching forehead be there hung
When in my arms, wi' a' thy charms,
Of planets all were in the blue again.
"Ha! ha! Sir Dainty! there must be a nurse
I love to see the cottage smoke
Her form majestic droop'd in pensive woe,
As her weak hand could any meaning tell,
O whistle, and I'll come to you, my lad:
At the first word that Susan said
Or from the field a shock of stubble thieves.
Or, following with unwearied watch
Would melt at thy sweet breath.--By Dian's hind
Much doth it scare the superstitious wight,
At morn my sick heart hunger scarcely stung,
And loved to dwell in darkness and dismay
Who sin so oft have mourn'd, yet to temptation ran?
Counting his woe-worn minutes, by the strokes
The air around with Beauty--we inhale
And gummy frankincense was sparkling bright
But faith! the birkie wants a manse,
Then how should I for heavenly mercy pray,
And made thy snare a spider's thread,
O merry hae I been cloutin a kettle,
Yet one I would select from that proud throng,
But dash the tear-drop from thine eye;
Than the soft rustle of a maiden's gown
To the old mill farewell, to the lock, pens, and waters,
When Cynthia smiles upon a summer's night,
The stars they were among my dreams;
And I could witness his most kingly hour,
Would often beat its wings, and often too
But, taught by the bright Caledonian lance,
And docks and thistles shake their seedy heads,
Amid the thrush's song. Away! Avaunt!
Answering each other on the Palatine,
Droning unwelcome tidings on his ear,
I loved her from my boyhood--she to me
Temple and tower went down, nor left a site:
Ye bade me write you what they mean,
Trowth, they had muckle for to blame!
Depending on some higher chance--
But she saw not: her heart was otherwhere:
Of teeming sweets, enkindling sacred fire;
Then ekes his speed and faces it again,
Here, too, his boy essayed the dreadful leap
Fierce are Albania's children, yet they lack
(An' Will's a true guid fallow's get,
Methinks it now is at my will to start
A faithless woman's broken vow.
Upheld on ivory wrists, or sporting feet:
Then, lighting on the printless verdure, turn'd
The white sail set, the gallant Frigate tight--
That broodest o'er the troubled sea of the mind
All breathing human passion far above,
That strain flows round th' untimely tomb where Riddel lies.
Waving thy silver pinions o'er my head.
O Wedding-guest! this soul hath been
The bairns gat out wi' an unco shout,
Oh thou that wert so happy, so adored!
That knows his rider.  Welcome to their roar!
These minced leaves on me, and passing through
Are met--as if at home they could not die--
Touching with dazzled lips her starlight hand.
And they were healthy with their food;
Here's a health to them that's awa,
Of Dian's sisterhood; and, kind lady,
Sae, when you hae an hour to spare,
Its length?--A minute's pause, a moment's thought;
Till, faith, wee Davock's turn'd sae gleg,
I saw the sweetest flower wild nature yields,
Yea, every flower and leaf of every clime,
And the hills of silken grass like to cushions to the view,
Beneath thy wan, unwarming beam,
And, the last kindness left me then to do,
Whisp'ring spirits round my pillow
Come to my arms, my Katie, my Katie,
Among the fern or in the gorse;
Towards her, and awakes--and, strange, o'erhead,
Virtue's blossoms there shall blow,
The watcher of thy sleep and hours of life,
And she's a fame that never tires;
But some will spend, and some will spare,
With a calm languor, which, though to the eye
Home furthest off grows dearer from the way;
Down amang the broom, the broom,
I love thee, Nith, thy banks and braes,
Ere Greece and Grecian arts by barbarous hands were quelled.
Could all this be forgotten? Yes, a schism
For a time they abandon the cave and the chase:
A ram goes bleating: Winder of the horn,
The time flew by wi' tentless heed,
The news o' princes, dukes, and earls,
He need na fear their foul reproach
Law, physic, politics, and deep divines:
That come a swooning over hollow grounds,
He found a badger hole and bolted in.
To such the gentle murmurs of the main
She sigh'd for Agnes' dreams, the sweetest of the year.
All, save the lone Soracte's height, displayed
Up! up! my friend, and quit your books,
What private feuds the troubled village stain!
The smile or frown of awful Heav'n,
What are they, pray, but spiritual Excisemen?
In a green island, far from all men's knowing?
And a' is young and sweet like thee;
Then, who her pangs and pains will soothe,
And next the title following close behind,
How dismal tolled, that night, the city clock!
Thirst for another love: O impious,
An' name the airles  an' the fee,
Though changed, no doubt, from what I was, when first
Through caves, and palaces of mottled ore,
While larks, their naked nest by force forsook,
For thrice I drew ane without failing,
When each Conception was a heavenly Guest--
I ken he weel a snick can draw,
So home-fed pleasure fills the song
O Heaven wide! O unseen parent dear!
(Hey, and the rue grows bonnie wi' thyme),
How I did wi' the Session sort,
Too much adoring--whatsoe'er thy birth,
Made purple riot: then doth he propose
Tho' ye was trickle, slee, an' funny,
No hungry generations tread thee down;
Endymion! dearest! Ah, unhappy me!
He rushed into the field, and, foremost fighting, fell.
Wha the deil ever thinks o' the road he has past?
And longer with politics not to be cramm'd,
"Tell him, if e'er again he keep
Ah! little thought we 'twas our last!
An' Robin's bonnet wave wi' crape,
And whomsoe'er along the path you meet
Man should then a monster prove?
Unfolds her tender mantle green,
And smiled as in the sweetest sleep,
And tuned his farewell in the dim twilight;
For well I know thy gentle mind
Until his heart is well nigh over wound,
Yea, by that law, another race may drive
Remember Tam O' Shanter's mare.
The wind, that shade nor motion made,
But fare ye well, auld Nickie-ben!
Sleep I canna get, for thinkin' o' my dearie.
Thou shouldst mount up to with me. Now adieu!
Stop! there he is, as sure's a gun,
Some plainly living voices were,
The bank with brambles overspread,
The bees are lost amid the rout
Where thou couldst sing of other spheres,
The Parent, Friend, and now the more than Friend:
O wad ye tak a thought an' men'!
Will generous Graham list to his Poet's wail?
Farewell the glen sae bushy, O!
And quote in classic raptures, and awake
Trembled; she nothing said, but, pale and meek,
Came open-eyed to guess what we would speak:--
Have dealt upon the seven-hilled City's pride;
And then were gulph'd in a tumultuous swim:
And thinks it blasphemy to be so wise.
The light uplifting of a maiden's veil;
I can feel by its throbbings will soon be at rest.
Oft catching prickly struttles on their rout,
He sung, and turned each furrow down,
Of weeds were cold beneath his cold thin feet;
He'll draw me fifteen pun' at least.--
Condensed their scattered rays--they would not form a Sun.
The King's most humble servant I,
She's stately like yon youthful ash,
Oh! press me with thy little hand;
And bird and beast in covert rest,
How pure, amang the leaves sae green:
'Tis but the balmy-breathing gale,
Even he, of cattle the most mild,
That paleness warms my grave, as though I had
Her een sae bright, her brow sae white,
Our senses narrow, and our reason frail,
That merry night we get the corn in,
Crushing the despot's proudest bearing!
The old cock robin to the stye is come,
Nought that he saw his sadness could abate:
Beheld thee, pluck'd thee, cast thee in the stream
Of the Wood-Gods, and even the very trees.
That to the sleeping woods all night
From law, however stern, which tends their strength to nerve .
Mantling the east, by Aurora's peering hand
The last of all her thoughts would be,
The stately swan majestic swims,
"Or shall we listen to the over-wise,
But I'se repeat each poor man's pray'r,
And tho' the puny wound appear,
Still richer breathes and fairer blows,
From thee, fair Venice!  have their colours caught:
That shakes and swees awhile, but still keeps straight;
Pull the string, ruling passion the picture will show him.
I was bred up at nae sic school,
The roaring wind! it roar'd far off,
To run for what it neer achieves.
The paitrick whirrin o'er the ley,
Flapped the broad ash-leaves oer the pond reclin'd,
Than thus to live and love with thee the summer day and night!
The robin in the hedge descends,
But of ideal Beauty, which became
Muirland George, Muirland George,
Even they maun dare an effort mair,
Of five long winters! and again I hear
Then up he rose, like one whose tedious toil
There wons auld Colin's bonnie lass,
Enough of ought ye like but grace;
Such tenderness as mine? Great Dian, why,
Of our own Alfred, of Helvetian Tell;
Like wasps into a grocer's shop,
As if he always listened to the sighs
And keeps one hour and never stays it out.
Approving all, she faded at self-will,
So scantly, that it seems her bridal night,
She tauld thee weel thou was a skellum,
Mute thou remainest--Mute! yet I can read
And soothe me with tidings o' nature's decay:
The four-gill chap, we'se gar him clatter,
With broad leaves of the sycamore
With his philibeg an' tartan plaid,
Came up,--a courtly smile upon his face,
Ye true "Loyal Natives," attend to my song,
But gie them guid cow-milk their fill,
And if from me thou wilt not go,
Peerest to meditate the healing leap:
Fu' lightly danced he in the ha'.
Blue heaven, and a silver car, air-borne,
The kind love that's in her e'e.
Throughout, as fearful the whole charm might fade.
Thy voice, nor catch from thy wild eyes these gleams
My Mary's asleep by thy murmuring stream--
While 'gainst his forehead he devoutly press'd
But disappointments, pains, and every woe
Of mortals each to each, against the blooms
O let me then by some sweet dreaming flee
A woman who was not thy mother.
My heart with rapture not its own,
Borne, like thy bubbles, onward: from a boy
Thyself to choose the richest, where we might
That foolish, selfish, faithless ways
When from the hills where springs the brawling Coil,
Fer touzling a lass i' my daffin.
O Fortune, they hae room to grumble!
What horrors may discomfort thee and me.
How can ye charm, ye flow'rs, with all your dyes?
Whose far white walls along them shine,
(The coarser pleasures of my boyish days,
All things both great and small:
"Enough, enough, my yeoman good,
I dwell in trifles like a child,
But thou art queen within my breast,
Like waters shot from some high crag,
Upon the gold clouds metropolitan,
Charm'd magic casements, opening on the foam
Medicined death to a lengthened drowsiness:
She stifled: transfixed there it grew like a pearl,
While thro' thy sweets she loves to stray,
Their rival scarfs of mixed embroidery,
What dangers thou canst make us scorn!
"Whence came ye, jolly Satyrs! whence came ye!
Those who would watch. Perhaps, the trembling knee
The cold earth with thy bloody bosom prest.
We both to service went from sports and play,
But truce with peevish, poor complaining!
I met thee in earth's bosom, all my power
Who takes advantage of the gale
And vacant on the rippling waves doth look,
Great Nature spoke with air benign,
And ever since that martial Synod met,
The solitary felt a hurried change
The impatient doves, up rose the floating car,
And all the clouds, and felt his bosom clean
Sweet Female Beauty hand in hand with Spring;
To Amphitrite; all my clear-eyed fish,
And ere the Sabbath he had three.
Upon thy vaporous bosom, magnified
With ardent eyes, complexion sallow,
Where hung a silver lamp, whose phosphor glow
Arch--empire--each thing round thee--and Man plods
Dry-withering, waste my foamy streams,
His way through thorns to ashes--glorious Dome!
Ask why God made the gem so small,
Of smothering fancies, patiently sat down;
Far as the mariner on highest mast
The boisterous, midnight, festive clarion,
--The evening darkness gathers round
Wide pinions to keep here; nor do I dread
Of trumpets--Lycius started--the sounds fled,
That my soft verse will charm thy daughters fair,
No spherey strains by me could e'er be caught
Oer meadows dew-besprent; and beetle wakes
Bids elegance and splendour rise;
To mak amends for scrimpit stature,
Revel and feast assumed the rule again:
Can Man its shattered splendour renovate,
The eagle, from the cliffy brow,
Nae doubt they'll rive it wi' the plew;
The budding twigs spread out their fan,
Where but to think is to be full of sorrow
But mete his cunning by the old Scots ell;
When sweet, like modest worth, she blusht,
Waves trough, rebound, and furious boil again,
Thou'll break my heart, thou bonnie bird,
We'se gie ae night's discharge to care,
Yet ne'er with wits profane to range,
"Lamia, what means this? Wherefore dost thou start?
Wi' him it ne'er was under hiding:
Far from her moon had Phoebe wandered;
Fain would I waft such blessing upon thee,
Amid his hapless victim's spoil:
How sweet it were on lake or wild savannah,
Spread greyly eastward, thus a chorus sang:
To run the twelvemonth's length again:
And food for meditation, nor pass by
Her moor's red-brown wi' heather bells,
Thou shalt not go the way of aged men;
Till I met my old boy in a Cunningham fair;
But, ah! deform'd, dishonest to the sight!
Abundant recompence. For I have learned
So woful, and of such deep sorrowing,
When Death comes in wi' glimmering blink,
And who is she, be-times abroad,
And thou, sweet excellence! forsake our earth,
Or liker still to one who should take leave
And through the woods of reed to tear
To startle princes from their easy slumbers.
That urges switching tail nor mends his pace,
"Young man of Latmos! thus particular
No thought had man or maid of rest or home,
Ah! such, alas! the hero's amplest fate!
The firstlings of his little flock,
That night the Baron dreamt of many a woe,
And then her three hours' work at night!
My daughter! with thy name this song begun!
Stranger! henceforth be warned; and know, that pride,
Swiftly seek, on clanging wings,
Perchance speak, kneel, touch, kiss--in sooth such things
"Oh wherefore? wherefore? tell me why
The far foreign land, or the wild rolling sea.
But when I came to feel how far above
And comes not ay when sought, man.
A song of love, too sweet for earthly lyres,
Went to seek him and cursed him outright for a goose;
Clank over sceptred cities; Nations melt
And some instruct the shepherd-train,
It spurned him from its lowliest lot,
Just at this season Ramazani's fast
Your sair taxation does her fleece,
I, Coelus, wonder, how they came and whence;
Aye, 'bove the withering of old-lipp'd Fate
And cracking whips, and shepherd's hooting cries,
Lo! Chivalry, your ancient Goddess, cries,
Tho' faith, sma' heart hae I to sing!
And sloes, dim covered as with dewy veils,
If ye'll let Hughie Graham gae free.
The Being who upheld it through the past?
Poor dunghill sons of dirt and mire
Those looks immortal, those complainings dear!
With honest joy our hearts will bound
Except in such a page where Theseus' spouse
She saw her glories star by star expire,
In those still moments I have wish'd you joys
Cried Betty, rising from the bed,
(Instinct's a brute, and sentiment a fool!)
And howsoe'er our tongues may ill reveal it,
And gaze, untired, the Morn--the Noon--the Eve away.
And echo back the voice of thine own tongue?
Moving but with the mighty ebb and flow.
And he has stolen away my food.
Garlands of every green, and every scent
Such as Creation's dawn beheld, thou rollest now.
And having once turn'd round, walks on
But are their hearts as light as ours,
They be of what is worthy,--though not drest
To its huge self; and the minutest fish
And curb'd, think on't, O Latmian! did I sit
The doctrine, to-day, that is loyalty sound,
Wha hae nae check but human law,
(Even like a Lady vow'd and dedicate
Now on the smoke of blazing bolts she flies,
See approach proud Edward's pow'r--
But by that health, I've got a share o't,
Are domes where whilome kings did make repair;
Grew strong within me: wherefore serve me so,
Then out spak mim-mou'd Meg o' Nith,
Now Harry he had long suspected
Therefore for her these vesper-carols are.
His likeness cam up the house staukin,
And our guid wife's wee birdie cocks;
And gay long purple, with its tufty spike,
And o'er the lea I leuk fu' fain,
Find a fresh sward beneath it, overgrown
And then he sat him down to grieve,
When the blue day-light's in the skies,
Low-ebb'd still hid it up in shallow gloom;--
The dewdrops on every blade of grass are so much like silver drops
Admiring Nature in her wildest grace,
Or when the north his fleecy store
Heart, Soul could seek--Tongue ask--Away with words! draw near,
Jarr'd his own golden region; and before
For she was tender, and I've often known
Who act so counter heavenly mercy's plan?
I watch and dote upon the silver lakes
We stand, and in that form and face behold
A Lord--a Peer--an Earl's son!--
The scourge of the seas, and the dread of the shore;
To rule their torrent in th' allowed line;
Unheard of yet; and it shall still its cries
I have not flattered its rank breath,  nor bowed
O, had she been a country maid,
Ye tender bibbers of the rain and dew,
To find a place where I may greet the maid--
Or felt but a great dream! O I have been
But in the fair presence o' lovely young Jessie
Could I the rich reward secure,
The helpless looks of blooming Infancy,
And folks in office at the mention fret,
Warming and growing strong in the belief
And many a rock which steeply lowers,
No, pasture molehills used to lie
The dreary melody of bedded reeds--
What little town by river or sea shore,
As on the morn to distant Glory dear,
Though now one phalanxed host should meet the foe,
By some sweet elf I'll yet be dinted,
Mortals, who sought and found, by dangerous roads,
A hapless lover courts thy lay,
The blight and blackening which it leaves behind,
Incessant batter at the window pane,
Hence, pageant history! hence, gilded cheat!
To fix a place and choose an early home,
The Arch of Triumph! and for this the tears
It came. Also imaginings will hover
"What ails you? wherefore weep you so?"
And greet thee morn and even in the skies."
Tears, at the thought of those enchantments cold
O'erwhelm'd, and spurn'd, and batter'd, ye are here!
She did so breathe ambrosia; so immerse
To take right ways, as Jenny should have ta'en,
Chimariot, Illyrian, and dark Suliote!
While Auld wi' hingin lips gaed sneakin'
Be still the unimaginable lodge
To him the dismal storm appeared
When shall I see the wood and plain,
Weel pleas'd he greets a wight so famous,
"His great bright eye most silently
Let the rose glow intense and warm the air,
The scrip, with needments, for the mountain air;
And bear the scorn that's in her e'e?
Which met at thy creating; at whose joys
Plain plodding industry, and sober worth:
But hawks will rob the tender joys
That set sharp racks at work, to pinch and peel.
Quo' I, "If that thae news be true!
From where the Feal wild woody coverts hide;
The Magna Charter flag unfurls,
Stalking along as white as driven snow,
O wert thou, love, but near me;
O! a' ye flocks o'er a' the hills,
The owlets through the long blue night
Then stirs the feeling infinite, so felt
As for the deil, he daur na steer him!
Jenny, wha kens the meaning o' the same,
Were all thy proud historic deeds forgot--
Oh Peggy's gown was chocolate and full of cherries white;
"O Hearkener to the loud clapping shears,
Of flowers, and fearful from its loveliness,
Blue, glossy green, and velvet black
I'll eat the apple  at the glass,
Sepulchral from the distance all around.
And all around her shapes, wizard and brute,
Youthful Chloe, charming Chloe,
Resound; and the dungeons unfold:
A dream of ane that never wauks.
Yet oft the enormous skeleton ye pass,
If I sigh through the window when Jerry
Sick--sick; unfound the boon--unslaked the thirst,
Their crimpled, curdled leaves, will shine and hide.
Thy sympathetic tear maun fa'--
More secret than a nest of nightingales?
Stop!--for thy tread is on an Empire's dust!
He hears the mountain storm and feels it not;
Was there a Poet born?--but now no more,
But it's ne'er be sae wi' whiskey Jean,--
Seen in the praise of beauty's eye.
Huge elm, with rifted trunk all notched and scarred,
The splashing comforts of the pond to meet,
When Love and Beauty heard the news,
For soaring too audacious in the sun,
Still unimpaired, though old, in the Soul's haunted cell.
Not for such purpose were these altars placed:
When shall her Olive-Branch be free from blight?
The wrecks are all thy deed, nor doth remain
Is--Love, forgive us!--cinders, ashes, dust;
His warm arms, thrilling now with pulses new,
Or were I in the wildest waste,
While villains ripen fray with time;
The nodding oxeye bends before the wind,
Not much he kens, I ween, of Woman's breast,
To honour thee, and thy gone spirit greet;
All freshly steep'd in morning dews.
Thou dipp'st them in the taintless wave;
But ere my living life return'd,
Three hizzies, early at the road,
Will you (the Major's with the hounds,
Nor lets me wander where thy vallies lie.
Or wilt thou leave thy mammie's cot,
Her warriors but to conquer--she who veiled
Chopping the grain to stop the gap close by
Yet do I often warmly burn to see
While thronged the citizens with terror dumb,
It was a sounding grotto, vaulted, vast,
To catch the sparrow on his bed;
And also Barskimming's gude knight,
Had lifted Calidore for deeds of glory.
I took thee as my staff to guide
Some teach to meliorate the plain,
Bright as a cloudless summer sun,
Lord weigh it down, and dinna spare,
Say, man's true genuine estimate,
Come, Winter, with thine angry howl,
She had been living like to you and I.
Haply, my sires have left their shed,
Unveil'd the summer heaven, blue and clear,
Than to be crush'd, in striving to uprear
In winter's loaded garment keenly blows
I sue not for my phalanx on the plain;
On one another; Pity ceased to melt
Should I but dare a hope to speel,
Was it for this, wi' canny care,
And to a thought such shape and image given,
By day, and in the silent night,
They shout and hollo down the noisy streets.
Reek through the sultry plain, with legions scattered o'er.
But where of ye, O Tempests! is the goal?
And all mechanics' many-apron'd kinds.
I wad turn my back on you and it a',
O tread ye lightly on his grass,--
Disturbing the grand sea. A drainless shower
For rest to smoke and chatter bye;
Preparing on his spell-bound prey to dart:
Her glance how wildly beautiful! how much
The boldest ventures first and dashes in,
With never a whisper in the Sea
Making it all one emerald:--how profound
Of dying fish; the vermeil rose had blown
The mourned--the loved--the lost--too many! yet how few!
And this place our forefathers made for man!
Yet still one seraph's left on earth,
I see the flowers and spreading trees
For while life's dearest blood is warm,
Look o'er the ravage of the reeking plain;
Drifting o'er the frozen plain.
And every gulf, and every chasm old,
There sits in parchment robe arrayed, and by
My breast, or that of others, for a while.
Than throbbing blood, and that the self-same pains
And spin a verse or twa o' rhyme,
Inhuman man! curse on thy barb'rous art,
Nor 'mang the sp'ritual core present them,
Each Atlas-line bore off!--a shine of hope
Where sparkle distant worlds:--Oh, holiest Nurse!
And when my hope was at the top,
I heard a thousand blended notes,
Is like a fallen angel: trees uptorn,
That woman and her fleshless Pheere?
Life, thou soul of every blessing,
All thou couldst have of mine, stern Death! thou hast;
A moon-beam to the deep, deep water-world,
When pale the morning rises keen,
And happy units of a numerous herd
In massy hoariness; the ruined wall
If Spaniard, Portuguese, or Swiss
Oh wind that o'er my head art flying,
Flown, like a thought, until the morrow-day;
When wandering slow by Delphi's sacred side,
Tho' winter wild in tempest toil'd,
And ay the wild-wood echoes rang,
Of Este,  which for many an age made good
Their arms embraced, and their pinions too;
What can a young lassie, what shall a young lassie,
And seems no longer in a hurry.
And there's no a man in all Scotland,
The quick-eyed lizard rustles--and the bills
But under favour o' your langer beard,
I will delight thee all my winding course,
The boy loved him--and, when the Friar taught him,
I'm gaun to Mauchline holy fair,
And winter fought her battle strife and won.
Wi' lightsome heart I pu'd a rose,
Is there, that bears the name o' Scot,
With tranquil restoration:--feelings too
Some taller things the distance shrouds
And big with lofty views, he to the world
In its own eddy boiling and o'erwrought,
You something of her tale may trace.
Within his cot the largest ears of corn
And her whom he had loved in joy, he said
Nor its fair promise from the surface mow
And wae on the love that is fixed on a mailen'
For stealing o' the bishop's mare.
Among her kindred, wonder'd that such dower
Sendin' the stuff o'er muirs an' haggs
Like what was never heard in all the throes
Sweet Florence  could another ever share
Noises, in which the ears of industry delight.
And pointed out the patriot's stern duty;
With drops of that poor infant's blood;
Drumossie moor--Drumossie day--
For pity do not melt!"--"If I should stay,"
More grievous torment than a hermit's fast:--
The lustrous salvers in the moonlight gleam;
To pledge her health in draughts divine;
He went, like one that hath been stunn'd
And, as I feasted on its fragrancy,
Sorrow is but a shadow: now I see
She bow'd into the heavens her timid head.
Something too much of this:--but now 'tis past,
That there is no old power left to steep
Their melodies, and see their long hair glisten;
And Harold stands upon this place of skulls,
Let it not be among the jumbled heap
Silent and feared by all--not oft he talks
That maids will sing them on their bridal night.
Fall'n states and buried greatness, o'er a land
O dearly do I lo'e thee, Annie!
These aspirations in their scope incline,--
And interchange our vows of love.
This shadowy queen athwart, and faints away
'Bout whom ye spak the tither day,
Your heart can ne'er be wanting!
Or what the drumlie Dutch were doin';
O then, O then, thou wast a simple name!
So honoured but assumes a stronger, bitterer claim.
Leaving no drop in the bewildering cup,
In truth you'd find it hard to say,
To bring them to a right repentance,
Though making many slaves, Herself still free,
Why have ye left your bowers desolate,
Went down the vale of years; and 'tis their pride--
Lone on the bleaky hills the straying flocks
Turn to the whisperings of their former joy,
What are life's joys and gains?
Of his proud horse's mane: he was withal
Wakes the brisk harmony that sailors love;
I mourn through the gay, gaudy day,
'Mongst boughs pavillion'd, where the deer's swift leap
Has this to say, 'It was no deed of mine;'
He gaz'd into her eyes, and not a jot
If ever more should meet those mutual eyes,
But might I now each passing moment give
Thrill vital through and through;
And you forgive me." Lycius blush'd, and led
Was overta'en by darkness deep.
Stranger, go! Hea'vn be thy guide!
Great as thou art, yet paralleled by those,
Her smile's a gift, frae 'boon the lift,
To thee I bring a heart unchang'd.
In such a survey than the sating gaze
"The Bridegroom's doors are open'd wide
But, ah! he left the thorn wi' me.
Without a grave--unknelled, uncoffined, and unknown.
The other upon Saturn's bended neck
Hast thou a steed with a mane richly flowing?
In pale contented sort of discontent,
Of many-nationed spoilers from the Po
Where the nightingale doth sing
Or do ye find, at length, like eagles, some high nest?
Which feeds these deadly branches; for it were
Herry the louns o' the laigh countree,
Are ye not smitten by a youngling arm?
On their foundations, and unaltered all--
Have you found this, or t'other? there's more in the wind,
Happy is England! I could be content
I, fatherly, will kiss and daut thee,
But here no memory knows them not.
He is right scrupulous in one pretext
Monastic Zitza!  from thy shady brow,
For there were sleeping dragons all around,
Down marble steps; pouring as easily
Half-happy, by comparison of bliss,
At freaks repeated of our younger days,
A flowery tale more sweetly than our rhyme:
And I was free of haunts umbrageous;
Of roused-up millions: all that most endears
And let him with his corn begin.
No Adelaide walks the wood rides,
My heart it shall never be broken for ane.
Neath the eaves the ladder's set,
Ev'n winter bleak has charms to me
Of which, even now, I share at times the immortal lot?
Though she stood smiling o'er the sacrifice,
And eye the smoking, dewy lawn,
Their game of lives, and barter breath for fame:
Here too the woodman on his wallet laid
And Winter once rejoiced in glory.
Into the bloom of heaven: other light,
--This lusty lamb of all my store
The death-watch tick is stifled. Enter none
An' ran thro' midden-hole an' a',
Thin the closed ranks, and lead in Glory's fearful chase.
Shining like guineas with the sun's warm eye on--
Stepping like Homer at the trumpet's call,
Now past the midway from mortality,
Pillared in their sarcophagus, repose
And as the Ocean many bays will make
Among these fallen, Saturn's voice therefrom
Not five yards from the mountain-path,
There bees go courting every flower that's ripe,
I'll get a blessin' wi' the lave,
Its depth, and thence may draw the mind of Man
O Melancholy, turn thine eyes away!
The orange tints that gild the greenest bough,
[As I suppose] had more of hertis ese
To mouth 'a citizen,' a term o' scandal;
A writhing suppliant in thy way;
Lord Gregory, mind'st thou not the grove
London! right well thou know'st the day of prayer:
Here, where the ancient paid thee homage long--
That first in beauty should be first in might:
Wind slowly through the woody dale:
I ha'e nae wife--and that my bliss is,
Not all his mongrel diphthongs can compound;
When you did change your ring for mine
That from its wall rude passing clowns have thrown.
Not virtues, were those virtues more mature.
When the sober man's toil was exactly half done,
But or the day was done, I trow,
The servile, mercenary Swiss of rhymes?
An' folk begin to tak' the gate;
White over with its flowers--the grass that lay
I leave them as a father does his son.
And how my auld shoon suited her shauchled feet,
The hills with Latian echoes--I abhorred
A race-horse speed to Burton-hold;
Surveyed the dwelling of this Chief of power,
And to the road she turns her ears,
Whether my eyes can ever turn from thee!
And silken traces lighten'd in descent;
By this the stars were almost gone,
The yellow letter'd Geordie keeks.
With skirmish and capricious passagings,
To separate contemplation, the great whole;
Tam did na mind the storm a whistle.
And gave meek Cynthia her Endymion.
Which bards in fealty to Apollo hold.
There was no covert, no retired cave
Nor speak a word! but still as sleep
Aft, clad in massy, siller weed,
To a sleeping lake, whose cool and level gleam
I'm three times doubly o'er your debtor,
She from her memory oft repeats
Let me not think, soft Angel! shall it be so?
So did he feel, who pull'd the boughs aside,
Wert thou awkward, stiff, affected,
Gaunt, ghastly, ghaist-alluring edifices,
States fall--Arts fade--but Nature doth not die,
An' tease my name in kintry clatter:
I cannot find her haunts again.
Brief, brave, and glorious was his young career,--
Cast upward, through the waves, a ruby glow:
But in his delicate form--a dream of Love,
Bequeathing their hereditary rage
An' at his lordship steal't a look,
With fingers cool as aspen leaves. Sweet love,
And ran for stocks and set them round
A scrap of land they have, but they
The sun blinks blithe on yon town,
An hour may lay it in the dust: and when
Love has no gift so grateful as his wings:
From low-grown branches, and his footsteps slow
Dungeon'd in opaque element, to keep
But now unroof'd their palace stands,
And let us mind, faint-heart ne'er wan
Those fathers would spurn their degenerate son,
Of kindred loveliness: then he would sigh
The grand criterion of his fate,
Alas! can do but what they can!
But by a poor man's hope in Heav'n!
When wanting thee, what tuneless cranks
He gaz'd, he wish'd, he fear'd, he blush'd,
Which Sages venerate and Bards adore,
The poetry of earth is ceasing never:
Each tender maiden whom he once thought fair,
Ilk happing bird, wee, helpless thing,
Wi' wind and tide fair i' your tail,
Unknown and poor, simplicity's reward,
Oh what can ail thee Knight at arms
The winged Psyche with awaken'd eyes?
And when they reach'd the throned eminence
For not yet had he drunk of Lethe's stream;
Till painting gay the eastern skies,
Your fine Tom Jones and Grandisons,
Her head and hastens from the sport she fears:
Yet many a rural sound, and rural sight,
Waes me! she's in a sad condition:
There the king-fisher saw his plumage bright
Where small birds seek for seed:
To Vesper, for a taper silver-clear,
For a' the pride of a' the great?
God knows my heart! I twittered like a leaf,
Free from the world I would a prisoner be
The monarch may forget the crown
Clearly she saw, as other eyes would know
By ignorance and parching poverty,
And pile on human heads the mountain of my curse!
We hae plighted our troth, my Mary,
Some hungry spell that loveliness absorbs;
Moving more near the while. "O Haunter chaste
And freezes utterly unto the bone
Will shade us with their wings. Those fitful sighs
Of noises far away?--list!"--Hereupon
The parted bosom clings to wonted home,
Woe to the man that walks in public view
The shiftings of the mighty winds, that blow
The pert and forward things that dare
While Highlandmen hate tolls an' taxes;
With forest branches and the trodden weed;
But, Jeanie, say thou wilt be mine,
Ye ugly, creepin', blastit wonner,
Swept into wrecks anon by Time's ungentle tide!
Revere the remnants Nations once revered:
Mortgaging, gambling, masquerading;
The badger grins and never leaves his hold.
Of precious flowers pluck'd in Araby,
Whereon, it was decreed he should be rear'd
Fresh anchor'd; whither he had been awhile
But shortly they will cowe the loons;
Naked and bare of its great diadem,
And swings her tail and turns prepared to fly.
The shepherd threw his hook and tottered past;
Till grief my eyes should close,
But nought can glad the weary wight
The daisy is in blossom even now;
Has our delaying been; but foolish fear
A Kingless people for a nerveless state;
They've ta'en me in, and a' that;
By one, who at a distance loud halloo'd,
He drinks success to corn in language hoarse,
There, when new wonders ceas'd to float before,
Wh--re-hunting amang groves o' myrtles
His heart was warm, benevolent, and good.
Scarce fit to be the slave of him thou mad'st to mourn:
Heaves like a long-swept wave about to break,
Than 'twixt Hal and Bob for the famous job--
Seen mid the sapphire heaven's deep repose
A filly, buirdly, steeve, an' swank,
Compar'd wi' my delight is poor,
Beneath the silence of a poplar shade;
And I will always be thy guide,
The fault of a friend, bid an enemy live?
So still obey the guiding hand that fends
Went trickling down the golden bow he held.
In a' its crimson glory spread,
To join the living and the dead?
Yet do I curse thy pride that aye
Here roams the wolf--the eagle whets his beak--
My madness impious; for, by all the stars
Thro' future times to make his virtues last;
Mark many rude-carved crosses near the path:
And get the brutes the powers themsels
Went pouring forward with impetuous speed,
I have strange power of speech;
Should in their sister's love be blithe and glad,
Over a knightly brow; while they went by
And fright him as the morning frightens night!
Not mortal, but of heavenly progeny,
While New-Light herds, wi' laughin' spite,
Then, first and foremost, thro' the kail,
Where the cowslips do unfold, shaking tassels all of gold,
I hid my love when young till I
Goodbye! I'll soon be back."--"Goodbye!" said she:--
Go seeking sweeter places still,
Give me the cot below the pine,
For there I lost my father dear,
And now I've done, ye're each at once as free
Says the more 'tis a truth, Sir, the more 'tis a libel?
And still they were the same bright, patient stars.
There as he stood, he heard a mournful voice,
Of love-spangles, just off yon cape of trees,
Frae ilka danger keep him free,
For me 'twere bliss enough to know thy spirit blest!
And the cobbler, in spite of his bustle for pelf,
Joy was not always absent from his face,
Or pour, with Gray, the moving flow,
Her eyes outshone the radiant beams
The vine on high, the willow branch below,
Wi' a' this care and a' this grief,
The teeming earth a sudden witness bore
Barbaric dwellings on their shattered site,
The early lark that, from its bustle flies,
Tell me, my lady-queen, how to espouse
So, in lone Poverty's dominion drear,
Thus breath'd he to himself: "Whoso encamps
In prospect,--diamond gleams, and golden glows
To see the miscreants feel the pains they give,
With wayward melancholy; and I thought,
There's some sark-necks I wad draw tight,
And still it cried, 'Apollo! young Apollo!
But, finding in our green earth sweet contents,
All down the aisled place; and beneath all
But there are such who court the tuneful nine--
I met her in the greenest dells
But heaves impassion'd with the grateful throe?
For the dear God, who loveth us,
Enough of Battle's minions! let them play
And staggered like a mountain drunk, wedged in the waves almost.
Crashing the lance, he snuffs the spouting gore
Worn, but unstooping to the baser crowd,
O'er which all heavily the journeying years
High with excessive love. "And now," thought he,
Lo! I must tell a tale of chivalry;
That kens or hears about you, Sir--
Bursts from my heart, and mingles with the strain--
There's pleasure in its very smart.
And while the pony moves his legs,
Man marks the earth with ruin--his control
A hundred waterfalls, whose voices come
And while the old dames gossip at their ease,
The order'd system fair before her stood,
Tells bughtin-time is near, my jo;
Sky--Mountains--River--Winds--Lake--Lightnings! ye!
The wisest man the warl' e'er saw,
I would essay as I have sung to sing :
My pretty thing! then thou shalt sing,
If that daft buckie, Geordie Wales,
She look'd at me as she did love
Innumerable of stains and splendid dyes,
Ye favour'd, ye enlighten'd few,
For monie a year come thro' the sheers;
His appetite beyond his natural sphere,
"I fear thee, ancyent Marinere!
The liquid fire of strong desire
And in their dear petitions place him;
Woe, want, and murder o'er a land!
And from her chamber-window he would catch
Too much gaz'd at? Where's the maid
Greatly they wonder'd what the thing might mean:
And Love, which dies as it was born, in sighing,
Tho' Fortune's frown still hunts me down,
For now he's taen anither shore,
He'll shrieve my soul, he'll wash away
Of heroes gone! Against his proper glory
She stops, she stands, she looks about,
To glut the vengeance of a rival woman;
That on the windows spreads his feathers light,
And whisper one sweet word that I may know
The woodbine at the garden gate,
And terror shall leap at his heart.
And all that kings or chiefs e'er gain their toils repay.
They reached no nobler breast than thine, young, gallant Howard!
"Come home again, nor stop at all,
With woes far heavier than the ponderous tomb
God's help! my lady fair the conjuror plays
In soul and aspect as in age: years steal
While the brook, as bubbling by,
And cook'ry the first in the nation;
With open arms the stranger hail;
What! if from thee my wandering feet had swerv'd,
Bold Lover, never, never canst thou kiss,
Or where God Bacchus drains his cups divine,
Yet stedfast to thy home thy roots have been;
Growing, like Atlas, stronger from its load?
And then we parted,--not as now we part,
With turrets crown'd. Four maned lions hale
Thou art a gay and a bonie lass,
A coof like him wad stain your name,
And hallowed it with loveliness: 'tis lone,
Affright you? Did our old lamenting Thames
Whose heart had brooded, all that wintry day,
In raptures sweet, this hour we meet,
The carlin gaed thro' them like ony wud bear,
Gapes round the silent circle's peopled walls.
Telling me only where my nymph is fled,--
My Donald's arm was wanted then,
Swith to the Laigh Kirk, ane an' a',
Or lee-lang nights, wi' crabbit leuks
We'll frame the measure of our souls,
I know the man that must hear me;
From the blue dome, though I to dimness gaze
Then track along their feet, grown hoarse with noise,
Why in the name of Glory were they proud?
And bound it round Endymion: then struck
With lots of pictures, and good stories too,
Of kindness and of love. Nor less, I trust,
Ae day as the carle gaed up the lang glen,
Pale Scotia's recent wound I may deplore.
That not one fleecy lamb which thus did sever
But by the sweet side o' the Nith's winding river,
The ceaseless wonders of this ocean-bed.
And lowing steers that hollow echoes wake
Let me not break thy faithful heart,
What is more soothing than the pretty hummer
You seize the flow'r, its bloom is shed;
She had no knowledge when the day was done,
And sullenly drifting: yet my higher hope
For a' the patronage and meikle kindness
Let thy white shoulders silvery and bare
And Vice, that digs her own voluptuous tomb,
Plain, dull Stupidity stept kindly in to aid them
There's some exception, man an' woman;
Nell had the fause-house in her min',
For Spain is compassed by unyielding foes,
And the thyme it is wither'd, and rue is in prime."
But, if ye wish her gratefu' pray'r,
The naked levels till they tire,
O'er yon moss amang the heather;
And husseys hearken, and be warned from this,
The simmer to nature, my Willie to me.
The crow flocks from the oakwood went flopping oer the grain;
My loss I mourn, but not repent it,
And suffer Celia's quirks to be
And just conclude that "fools are fortune's care."
And port, O port! shine thou a wee,
Steal thine accents on mine ear.
"Gee hep" and "hoit" and "woi"--O I never call to mind
And struggles much and oft escape to win--
At random flies; they are the proper home
Long time in silence did their anxious fears
To draw the lovely, hapless Scottish Queen!
And over Glaucus held his blessing hands.--
Not in those visions to the heart displaying
As sweet a flock as ever grazed!
"As I lay in my bed slepe full unmete
The gay recess of Wisdom and of Wit
I coft a stane o' haslock woo',
But I'll big a bower on yon bonnie banks,
Childe Harold basked him in the Noontide sun,
"On pain' o' hell be rich an' great,"
To have seen those dead men rise.
"My silver planet, both of eve and morn!
I view'd the heavenly-seeming fair;
This warld's wealth when I think on,
Won by the unambitious heart and hand
O welcome, dear to love and me!
Where is my lovely mistress? Well-away!
Stands venerably proud; too proud to mourn
Its mighty self of convoluting sound,
Itself to Sorrow's most detested fruit,
An' tirl the hallions to the birses;
Enraptur'd more, the more enjoy'd,
Castor has tamed the planet Lion, see!
And babbles thorough silence, till her wits
It echoes in the far-outstretching wood.
And gie him o'er the flock, to feed,
Such stores as silent thought can bring,
To hide the cankering venom, that had riven
And he had owsen, sheep, and kye,
Came it? It does not seem my own, and I
Nor hundred-headed Riot here we meet,
While the mason, neath the slates,
For all belonged to all, and each was chief.
But this is Jock, an' this is me,
Should Hornie, as in ancient days,
And I shall hail the main and skies,
Keen, cruel, perceant, stinging: she, as well
Cry "wet my foot" for half the way;
Smiles made it nectar from the sky,
Of joy and grief at once. Grief overcame,
Hereat Peona, in their silver source,
'Till the last leaf o' the summer is flown,
Ripe from hue-golden swoons took all the blaze,
Still making work his selfish craft must mend.
And then comes ane-and-twenty, Tam.
With rutty lanes had no compare,
A brood of nature's minstrels chirp and fly,
The price of grain and rise and fall of stocks;
Again in fancied safety with his kind,
Shrine of all saints and temple of all Gods,
Then come, thou fairest of the fair,
Tarpeian?--fittest goal of Treason's race,
To admire the visor arched so gracefully
Of our poor sinfu', corrupt nature:
And Pierre,  can not be swept or worn away--
It was na sae in the Highland hills,
Return to whence they came--with like intent,
Wrought 'mang the lasses sic mischief,
Why Thought seeks refuge in lone caves, yet rife
But as the clegs o' feeling stang
When "Chevy Chase," his masterpiece of song,
Such as I sought for, and at moments found;
Clarinda, take this little boon,
Summers of thirst parched round thy homely bower
And soon it lightly dipt, and rose, and sank,
Its spark immortal, envying it the light
The fient a pride--nae pride had he;
A blackguard smuggler, right behint her,
The sinking sun is taking leave,
And ta'en the--Antiquarian trade,
Who now, ere Phœbus mounts the firmament,
A toying with the doves. Then,--"Mighty crown
Still my heart is with my love:
When gaping they besiege the tents,
Says the host, We shall burn out with thirst, he's so big.
So that it wean me from the weary dream
Sweet-shaped lightnings from the nadir deep
And that bright lance, against the fretted wall,
Around the corner up on worsted strung
Where royal cities stately stand;
'Till peace go with him to the tomb.
"Who could resist? Who in this universe?
Are love's own home and canopy.
What mortal hath a prize, that other men
To pluck thee from me? And, of thine own will,
One careless look on me she flung,
Art's works; nor must the delicate waters sleep
Wee Miller, neist the guard relieves,
To live one day of parting love!
And what behind it lay, all earth shall view.
On every wooden dish, a humble claim,
Whate'er keen Vengeance urged on foreign foe
For while they all were travelling home,
Into sweet air; and sober'd morning came
A quiet, pilfering, unprotected race.
The next one pops her down--and from her hand
The pride of all the flow'ry scene,
But at twal at night, when the moon shines bright,
His angry tail; red rolls his eye's dilated glow.
And he, as one, might 'midst the many stand
A white post points four different ways,
For your poor friend, the Bard, afar
Before me, till from these enslaving eyes
Must yield its pomp, and wait till Ages are its dower.
The world will say 'tis very idle,
The vulgar flourish like a weed,
Amongst them? Feelest not a kindred pain,
Frae Maidenkirk to Johnny Groat's;
Thy wreck a glory--and thy ruin graced
Though the fair Goddess long hath ceased to weep,
Are not the mountains, waves, and skies, a part
The halesome parritch, chief of Scotia's food:
I see it driving o'er the plain;
That patience now doth seem a thing, of which
There's the king-cup bright as gold, and the speedwell never cold,
Thoughts hid, but not less cherished than of old,
And Ops, uplifting her black folded veil,
Unto the things of earth, which Time hath bent,
There is no need of whip or wand,
At length she blush'd a sweet consent,
What's a' joys that gowd can gie?
The Roman friend of Rome's least-mortal mind,
Without me my sweet babe would die.
Do Thou, All-Good! for such thou art,
I strike my strain, far distant, to applaud
Up each spread stoven to the branches towers;
And, lassie, ye're but young ye ken;
More happy than betides mortality.
And wither drearily on barren moors:
Where, finding sulphur, a quadruple wrath
Will in its shelter trust her nest
Twa lines frae you wad gar me fissle,
Like the northern lights on snow.
And some kept up a shrilly mellow sound
Of visionary seas! No, never more
Of some steep mossy hill, where ivy dun
How lithe! When this thy chariot attains
Triumph, arch, pillar, all he doth displace
Till he'd not got a spittle to moisten the stone;
Wi' cits nor lairds I wadna shift,
Here the bold peasant stormed the Dragon's nest;
The rib-marked hides of restless cows to thrash.
O, my luve's like a red, red rose,
Born of the very sigh that silence heaves:
Peeled sticks they bear of hazel or of ash,
Far round the horizon's crystal air to skim,
I love with my old haunts to be
We'll light a spunk, and ev'ry skin,
But, a poor Naiad, I guess not. Farewel!
For scenes like this: an empire stern hast thou;
Hyperion, lo! his radiance is here!"
O let us not, like snarling tykes,
Thou whom chance may hither lead,
And, hissing with a forked tongue,
Though now decayed, tis not forgot,
Unwearied in that service: rather say
Ye nought but frowns might trace.
An unknown--but no more: we humbly screen
It is the moon--I ken her horn,
The poor wee thing was little hurt;
I see, astonied, that severe content
Not to be cured when Love itself forgets to please.
War on his temples. Do not all charms fly
And, far and near, the motley group
Should be engulphed in the eddying wind.
But she, poor woman, dwelt alone.
Wha'll ne'er be forgot in the Greys,
Ashes which make it holier, dust which is
Wae worth that brandy, burning trash!
His leathern doublet leaves a rustling sound.
I gie them a skelp, as they're creepin alang,
Ill was I then for toil or service fit:
And many else whose names may not be told.
And here and there, as up the crags you spring,
Of sheep I number'd a full score,
She made her a weel pay'd dochter.
Yon ill-tongu'd tinkler, Charlie Fox,
I've liv'd a life of sturt and strife;
And conned my thoughts as joys to me,
Her cutty sark, o' Paisley harn,
And Tagus dashing onward to the Deep,
As my bonnie westlin weaver lad
God keep thee frae thy mother's faes,
Of all that ever charm'd romantic eye:
Guid health, hale han's, an' weather bonny;
That blasts each bud of hope and joy;
I send you a trifle, the head of a bard,
Her mutchkin stoup as toom's a whissle:
Singing morning's happy songs with Mary O!
The very deeps did rot: O Christ!
And bound the holly round my head:
Ca' them whare the heather grows,
Felton! without incitements such as these,
Sae fam'd for his gratefu' return?
Are all abouten shining here and there,
O for the pasture, fields, and fen!
Till the Fates, nae mair severe,
And caught its tone with Death's prophetic ear;
Will ye go to the Indies, my Mary,
I long for scenes where man has never trod;
And thought on youthfu' pleasures mony:
Does common water make the floods,
Glimmer'd the white moon-shine.
I grant him his calm-blooded, time-settled pleasures,
'Bout which our herds sae aft hae been,
An' gin ye tax her or her mither,
Behold each mighty shade revealed to sight,
And there were sudden partings, such as press
She knelt, so pure a thing, so free from mortal taint.
Aught but a phantasy, and could be classed
And in the broad high-way, I met;
But weary fa' the waefu' woodie!
Our hands, and cry "Eureka!" "it is clear"--
And now they change--a paler Shadow strews
Own'd they the lovelorn piteous appeal:
He spake, and, trembling like an aspen-bough,
Steady thy laden head across a brook;
But sooth'd as now, flash'd sudden everywhere,
The dinner being over, the claret they ply,
In Want's most lonely cave till death to pine,
The flowers of autumn for your coronals.
To a few paces; not at all surmised
The bye-road back again to take,
He might not in house, field, or garden stir,
Of cataracts, where nursing Nature smiled
By fits the sun's departing beam
For down they rush as though they would be free,
The murmuring bleatings of unfolding sheep,
And, when the pleasant sun is getting low,
O! hear my ardent, grateful, selfish pray'r!--
Ploughmen loose their weary teams:
Thoughts which should call down thunder, and the flame
Downward too flows many a tress
And all at once their breath drew in
To hear her morning-step upon the stair.
Such as sat listening round Apollo's pipe,
Some one of a troop of dragoons was my daddie,
And dare the war with all of woman born:
I know the covert, for thence came I hither."
There's a cag of small swipes half as sour as a wig.
His colour sicken'd more and more,
The driver, of those steeds is forward bent,
He flies, he wheels, distracted with his throes;
Blest Highland bonnet! Once my proudest dress,
And though you with your utmost skill
For them his ears gush'd blood; for them in death
And tho' his brow be beld aboon;
High-wav'd his magnum-bonum round
The morn, the eve, the light, the shade, the flowers:
Fortune! if thou'll but gie me still
Bestirr'd themselves, thrice horrible and cold;
They gang in stirks and come out asses,
Not world on world upon these shoulders piled,
And thus to be cast out, thus lorn to die,
Nor ever sorrow stain the hour,
For by one step the blue sky shouldst thou find,
Beyond the tall tree tops; and in less time
How quiet here they lie in death's cold arms
And black Joan, frae Crighton-peel,
All thinking things, all objects of all thought,
I'll kneel to Vesta, for a flame of fire;
He shouts from nobody knows where;
In the calm grandeur of a sober line,
What is my Being! thou hast ceased to be!
I love thy wizard noise, and rave in turn
Serenely sleep:--she from a casket takes
O'er which it well might take a pleasant sleep,
Behold the hour, the boat arrive;
All round us; we but feel our way to err:
A Ruler of the waters and their powers:
'Twould make the Poet quarrel with the rose.
Startled frogs take vaunting leaps;
In hours of weariness, sensations sweet,
And shifts about the moving scene
Soft eyes looked love to eyes which spake again,
Keen recollection's direful train,
Of small and delicate proportion, keeps
Whase life is like a weel-gaun mill,
An' down gaed stumpie in the ink:
The buttercups make schoolboys eager run,
Come with the constant dawn upon thy morrows?
But when in Ayr, some half-hour's leisure,
Had sighed to many though he loved but one,
So lost to honour, lost to truth,
Great love I bear to a' the fair,
Leading tamed cattle in their tending strings,
Into Elysium; vieing to rehearse
The moral lesson bears, drawn from such pilgrimage.
The first ane was a belted knight,
To margin sallows, were the leaves he spied,
Those oracles which set the world in flame,
Three hours they labour'd at this travail sore;
Around thee blaw, around thee blaw,
All you had learnt in the day; and how to talk
In equanimity they never dwell,
Whiles crooning o'er some auld Scots sonnet;
Not Albuera lavish of the dead,
Aboon them a' I lo'e him better;
But one, whose gentleness did well accord
But the waves obeyed no sailor's call, and we knew not where to go.
I near-hand cowpit wi' my hurry,
His Holy of Holies--nor be blasted by his brow.
Sae gallant and sae gay a swain;
My dismal months no joys are crowning,
Because my thoughts were never free, and clear,
Amang the fresh green leaves bedew'd,
The thundering Lauwine --might be worshipped more;
Has cheer'd ilk drooping little flower,
From isles Lethean, sigh to us--O sigh!
He prayeth best who loveth best,
My pains o' hell on earth are past,
Favour from thee, and so I gave and gave
Had I na found the slightest prayer
But death shall find unlooked-for ways
She'll dart forth, and cloudward soar.
Witness brighter scenes of love?
Can point the brimful grief-worn eyes
Are things on which the dazzled senses rest
But it sealed freedom's sacred cause--
Whose trunk was mould'ring down with years;
Falsest of womankind, canst thou declare,
Where cities stretch as far as fame
To ca' the crack and weave our stockin',
We've lost a birkie weel worth gowd,
Far, far from spots my heart esteems,
And paces leisurely down amber plains
A naked waist: "Fair Cupid, whence is this?"
And I must abide by their scorn,
'Gainst mighty England and her guilty lord,
Without a sigh he left, to cross the brine,
Pearls that on the red rose hing
Was not embalm'd, this truth is not the less--
Crushing the cliffs, which, downward worn and rent
Books are out and books are read;
The fell harpy-raven took wing from the north,
Of amber 'gainst their faces levelling.
But flies in silence from the noisy boys;
Slowly, or rapidly--unwilling still
And suffocate true blessings in a curse.
Towards a crystal bower far away.
And hide in cooling trees, a voice will run
The social smile, the chain for Freedom's sake:
The softest dreams, the sweetest rest,
"This is no dream, my bride, my Madeline!"
Are mixed conspicuous: some recline in groups,
Thy crystal stream, Afton, how lovely it glides,
That feeling heart but acts a part--
O sylvan Wye! Thou wanderer through the woods,
Dancing before the morning gates of heaven?
I'll teach my boy the sweetest things;
Thus dame the winter-night regales
Courts for cowards were erected,
He sang the story up into the air,
But meet and plunder on and feel no sin--
But, Lord, remember me an mine,
He startled her; but soon she knew his face,
Now I direct my eyes into the west,
Quoth I, "With a' my heart I'll do't;
But here we're a' in ae accord,
The morning road is thronged with merry boys
To see the startled frog his route pursue;
Has met wi' the queen o' the fair.
As Autumn to Winter resigns the pale year.
She prefaced half a hint of this
And laugh and shout and fright the scampering hogs.
The death-bolts deadliest the thinned files along,
If aught that giver from my mind efface;
Now straying beams from day's unclosing eye
And Susan has a dreadful night.
By the gipsey's old budget, for mending a chair.
He to the nameless, ghastly wretch assign'd.
Than the pure freshness of thy laurels green.
Which streams upon her stream, and glassed within it glows,
Lead'st thou that heifer lowing at the skies,
When the West glows like a fire
Play--pastime--all time's blotting pen concealed,
Here ceased the swift their race, here sunk the strong;
Of the cleft statue, with a gentle leap
Go live, poor wanderer of the wood and field!
Ah! wherefore all this wormy circumstance?
And kept the country-side in fear.)
There was Lorenzo slain and buried in,
And that tall poplar pointing to the sky
But when the ice our streams did fetter,
Forbye sax mae, I've sell't awa,
And een this little shepherd's purse
To be my spouse: thy paleness makes me glad;
The blue bell's quiet hanging blooms,
Then I gaed hame at crowdie-time
'Tis very true, my sov'reign king,
"Yet, let not this too much, my son,
That piled these stones, and with the mossy sod
See him, the poor man's friend in need,
Those cut-throat bandits in the paths of fame.
Nor want but--when he thirsted;
Dost weep for me? Then should I be content.
Wreather of poppy buds, and weeping willows!
And turn'd me round to hide the flood
Beneath thy pinions canopy my head!
By every lull to cool her infant's pain:
That I wad tent and shelter there.
But warily tent, when you come to court me,
And take another pinch, to help me through.
Her breath is like the fragrant breeze
Like fairy pins amid the flowers.
Had more been heard. Thus swell'd it forth: "Descend,
The frog croaks loud, and maidens dare not pass
There the blithe Bee his fragrant fortress builds,
Whose slender feet wide-swerv'd upon the soft
An' come to stop those reckless vows,
Its deep foundations, hissing into foam.
M'Gill has wrought us meikle wae,
To beauty what man but maun yield him a prize,
How sweet unto that breast to cling,
O, what a feast her bonnie mou'!
In chase o' thee, what crowds hae swerv'd
Of gone sea-warriors; brazen beaks and targe;
Thy form and mind, sweet maid, can I forget?
The misery in fit magnificence.
And lovely women were as fair and warm,
And there was purport in her looks for him,
And there he saw his auld father,
He knew them flatterers of the festal hour,
Shewing like Ganymede to manhood grown;
Kindest Alpheus, for should I obey
To feel the follies, or the crimes,
"They Scotia's race among them share;
Oh! love me, love me, little boy!
Over their beauties, earthly, or sublime:
Meantime I will keep watch on thy bright sun,
So that we look around with prying stare,
Sae I conclude, and quat my chanter,
Where on the watch the staid Lieutenant walks:
And there was one soft breast, as hath been said,
To scores o' lambs, an' packs of woo'!
In the middle of a brook,--whose silver ramble
And thou may'st find a new Calypso there.
And art thou gone, and gone for ever?
Sometimes a dropping from the sky
I clung about her waist, nor ceas'd to pass
Wi' your priest-skelping turns,
With an eternal Glory--which, if made
But, what afflicts my peace with keenest ruth
But life to me's a weary dream,
We see the waving of the mountain pine;
Mutter'd: "What lonely death am I to die
Chiels wha their chanters winna hain,
Her throat in vain, and die, heart-stifled, in her dell.
A happy wooer, to the flowery mead
The murmuring streamlet winds clear thro' the vale;
Her limbs where nothing hid them, thou dost rear
When others were all blind; and were I given
Like him there is na twa, Jamie,
When it makes a man mad all the days of his life?
The sister tenants of the middle deep;
The vera wee-things, todlin', rin
Dost thou now please thy thirst with berry-juice?
But hornpipes, jigs, strathspeys, and reels,
Laid on thy lap, his eyes to thee upturn,
"Is come as a brother thy sorrows to share.
Oft honour'd with supreme command,
I saw thee sit there in disconsolate sighs,
Had number'd out my weary days,
Yes, and those of heaven commune
And aye the wild wood echoes rang--
'Twas freedom! and at once I visited
And trees whose gums are poison; such the plants
The doubling storm roars thro' the woods;
The gowdspink, music's gayest child,
Can soothe the sad bosom of joyless despair.
Whence, from a certain spot, its winding flood
That heals the wounds o' care and dool;
A censer fed with myrrh and spiced wood,
What's a' your jargon o' your schools,
"Titans, behold your God!" at which some groan'd;
Hath Phoebus wooed in vain to spoil her cheek,
But at the setting I must bid adieu
I saw my first-born tumbled from his throne!
But thee, Theocritus, wha matches?
And spurn the instruments thou wert to use
Wild as the winter now tearing the forest,
Upon soft verdure saw, one here, one there,
For there the lily, and the musk-rose, sighing,
And are these two all, all the crew,
Why should I tell thee what thou so well seest?
Pearls, while on land they wither'd and adored.
As ever Spring yclad in grassy dye:
Wi' sma' to sell, and less to buy,
Nor deemed before his little day was done
The friend we trust, the fair we love,
He lo'es sae weel his craps and kye,
And our gudewife has gotten a ca'
The benmost neuk beside the ingle,
Like morts of folken flocking at a fair.
No statesman nor soldier to plot or to fight,
Bring hazel-nuts to hold their ale;
In truth she is as sweet a maid
Then straight he makes fifty, the pick o' his band,
Consider, Sirs, how we're beset;
The Holy Hermit rais'd his eyes
Your interest in the Poet's weal;
Developing in that one glance the Deity.
And threaten'd worse damnation.
How long in that same fit I lay,
The harmony of things,--this hard decree,
Beckon me sternly from soft "Lydian airs,"
To have thee understand, now while I clasp
Hush! no exclaim--yet, justly mightst thou call
A broom-stick o' the witch o' Endor,
Still on thy shores, fair Leman! may find room
Is it that summer's forsaken our valleys,
The old fox started from his dead disguise;
Once spiritual, are like muddy lees,
Death comes, wi' fearless eye he sees him;
That my poor partner Jenny had been found
She listens, but she cannot hear
'Mong men, are pleasures real as real may be:
And I will come again, my luve,
To look so plainly through them? to dispel
And ithers plant them in my room.
Unborrowed from the eye.--That time is past,
To light and joy unknown before.
Maxwell, if merit here you crave
Rose, like a mission'd spirit, unaware:
Yet still, if fondly Superstition grieves,
NOTE.--The remaining poems in this section are taken from a series,
The shelter of the crag to gain,
Truths told by gipsies, and expounded dreams;
No pain and small suspense, a joy perceives
Walk smiling o'er this Paradise;
Yet my fancy has pierced to his heart, and pourtrays
By constant toil and constant prayer supplied.
Prophetic Fount, and Oracle divine?
If mantling high she fills the golden cup,
And, trust me, not Potosi's mine,
Wi' bonnet aff, quoth I, "Sweet lass,
And there she sits most meek and most alone;
Which, when his cattle lair, he runs to get;
Till Fate the curtain drop on worlds to be no more.
During the pain Mnemosyne upheld
Returning home at evening, with an ear
I've been at druken writers' feasts,
There is a small and simple Pyramid,
For my own sullen conquering: to him
With a pure passion? should I not contemn
Nae mair thou'lt rowte out-owre the dale,
Will I to children utter, and repent.
Can I find reason why ye should be thus:
But here, where Murder breathed her bloody steam;--
The brethren o' the Commerce-Chaumer
By Rome--But whither would Conjecture stray?
May nip the clover round its nest;
Where summer's common flowers are seen,
On every blade the pearls hang,
Around the rotten tree the firetail mourns
While frosty winds blaw in the drift,
Where all the noises, that on peace intrude,
As Largs well can witness, and Loncartie tell.
Feel no more than their shadows there--
And go the week about, nine times in ten
By the dyke side, on stilly moor or fen,
Bewitch'd me towards; and I soon was near
Here, under this dark sycamore, and view
In mortared walls and pipes its symphonies,
Drink--drink, and live--Old Man! Heaven's realm holds no such tide.
Still shone her crown; that vanish'd, also she
And pale, but lovely, with maternal grief--
And lie down wi' my Collier Laddie.
He wha could brush them down to mools,
The skies which rain their plagues on men like dew--
Untaught that soon such anguish must ensue,
Who read of wars, and wished that wars would cease,
Wi' a cog o' guid swats, and an auld Scottish sang.
Yet such the fixed inveteracy wrought
An' may ye rax corruption's neck,
Its strain, when other harmonies, stopt short,
To regions where no more the laurel grew?
But cautious Queensberry left the war,
All ruddy,--for here death no blossom nips.
Gat tippence-worth to mend her head,
An' heard the restless rattons squeak
'Gainst those who most transgress his high command,
Before our forests heard the talk of men;
Your looped and widow'd raggedness defend you
"Where art thou wandering, little child?"
All records, saving thine, come cool, and calm,
A drama worthy o' the name o' Bruce;
As though the fanning wings of Mercury
"A cruel man and impious thou art:
The devil he swore by the kirk and the bell,
"Sparta hath many a worthier son than he."
When heart-corroding care and grief
Among the taller wood with ivy hung,
So mournful strange. Surely some influence rare
And consecrate the oath with draught, and dance till morn.
And when her lovely form I see,
And winds go fanning up and down
Solution sweet: meantime the frost-wind blows
But bless me wi' your heav'n o' charms,
Until, from the horizon's vaulted side,
Youth wasted--Minds degraded--Honour lost--
Bonnie laddie, Highland laddie,
Relented not, nor mov'd; "from every ill
Should think they better were inform'd
Hubbub increases more they call out "Hush!"
So wingedly: when we combine therewith,
Who sought the thing he loved. For nature then
Their ivy mantles, and the solemn scene
Her eyes are wild, her head is bare,
But where they dwelt, the vast and sumptuous pile
Of eddying storms; yet springs the trunk, and mocks
Far wandering, they were perforce content
Naked and bare the leafless trees repose.
With golden moss. His every sense had grown
Thou would be found deep drown'd in Doon;
(Hey, and the rue grows bonnie wi' thyme).
The hovel was ready to screen from a shower,
Another world, another universe,
By many a summer's silent fingering;
Which bled a' the wound o' my dolour again.
For whatsoever symbol thou art prized,
Lord, hear my earnest cry and pray'r,
Where 'gainst a column he leant thoughtfully
Plunge in the clouds for refuge, and withdraw
Is my duty--take heart, thou art welcome indeed.
Alas! you might have dragged me on
Through a dim passage, searching till he found
Not only bring them tidings hame,
But when on life we're tempest-driv'n,
The shepherd's pipe come clear from aery steep,
A careful moving caught my waking ears,
Mid thy uproarious madness--when the start
And the world's waste, have driven him far from those,
With such a paradise of lips and eyes,
Thrice sounds the Clarion; lo! the signal falls,
Lest we love those who love not us!--
She's saft at best, and something lazy,
The moonlight steep'd in silentness
His eyes are on thee bent, as thou didst poise
The pewit hollos "chewrit" as she flies
About the crisped oaks full drearily,
"My name is Fun--your cronie dear,
The present only toucheth thee:
Returns in an unceasing shower, which round,
And here's the grand fabric, our free Constitution,
Till icicles hing frae their beards;
In mirkest glen, at midnight hour,
Hard for the non-elect to understand.
O leeze me on the rock and reel;
Their share of the ditty. After them appear'd,
An' Livingstone, the bauld Sir Willie:
Here Harold was received a welcome guest;
My lord thinks meikle mair upon't.
And fair as the lily of morning that waves
Arches on arches!  as it were that Rome,
But spare its relics--let no busy hand
Fair Melody! kind Syren! I've no choice;
Frozen North, and chilling East,
But Harold felt not as in other times,
But, faith! he'll turn a corner jinkin,
O that's the chiefest warld's treasure!
And years, that bade thy worship to expire:
A full-brimm'd goblet, dances lightly, sings
Then thro' the dews I will repair,
That ye can please me at a wink,
And thoughts of self came on, how crude and sore
The serpent--Ha, the serpent! certes, she
Will gulph me--help!"--At this with madden'd stare,
But fairer and purer her breast.
The gay, green, flow'ry tresses shear
With order, symmetry, or taste unblest;
The chase gaed frae the north, man;
When rosy May comes in wi' flowers,
Of a proud, brotherly, and civic band,
Porphyro will leave me here to fade and pine.--
O'er moor and mountain, midnight theft to hatch;
And spread their fare; though homely, all they had:
And swore 'twas the way that their ancestor did.
There's a holier chase in your view;
In surly speed he helps the maids by force
Like some bold vet'ran, gray in arms,
But they wham the truth wad indite.
For sure he met with strange adventures.
To mourn the woes my country must endure,
She steddies with upright keel.
The host between the mountains and the shore,
Hyperion from the peak loud answered, "Saturn!"
Into a forest on the shores of Crete.
That we the mercy of the waves should rue.
For books in every neighbouring house I sought,
Crag jutting forth to crag, and rocks that seem'd
Tis Winter, and I love to read indoors,
As bees bizz out wi' angry fyke,
Sae ye wi' anither your fortune maun try.
Faint I, nor mourn nor murmur: other gifts
From the grass or flowret's cup,
Struts with the hens, and seems to like some best,
Rienzi! last of Romans!  While the tree
His only son for Hornbook sets,
Wander'd on fair-spaced temples; no soft bloom
And off they shout--the foremost bidding fair
Great bliss was with them, and great happiness
When from the last hill-top, my sire surveyed,
The winds were whispering through the grove,
My springs of life were poisoned.  'Tis too late:
O sweetly then thou reams the horn in!
I'se bless you wi' my hindmost breath--
And I in desolation: all that _was_
What gentle squeeze he gave each lady's hand!
Exchanged the look few bosoms may withstand,
The frailties of a heart so soft, yet bold--
Of Passion had consumed themselves to dust.
Then indeed thou'dst act a part.
Yon knot of gay flowers in the arbour,
She was a gordian shape of dazzling hue,
Might I be loved by thee like these of yore.
And breath'd a sister's sorrow to persuade
November chill blaws loud wi' angry sugh;
For ever warm and still to be enjoy'd,
And 'tis right just, for well Apollo knows
O let me cool it among the zephyr-boughs!
Lord, visit them wha did employ him,
These haunts I long have favoured, more as now
"One morn she left me sleeping: half awake
Into the deadening ether that still charms
Far sunken from the healthy breath of morn,
Towards the ground; but rested not, nor stopt
Where drunken Charlie brak's neck-bane;
She overlook'd things that I scarce could tell.
There's Lowrie the laird o' Dumeller,
While Summer, with a matron grace,
A spot he longed to see, nor cared to leave:
The toil-worn Cotter frae his labour goes,
Adieu! adieu! thy plaintive anthem fades
But both will chuckle oer their prisoners' sighs
I look'd far-forth, but little saw
I bounded o'er the mountains, by the sides
Though he should dance from eve till peep of day--
Just to ride post upon the wings of time
To urge the gloomy Wanderer o'er the wave?
While we sit bousing at the nappy,
Victory, might be lost, or might be won.
My only visitor! not ignorant though,
Wi' faith an' hope, an' love an' drink,
These secrets struck into him; and unless
Yet if thou wilt behold all beauty's store,
Rose-bloom fell on her hands, together prest,
Memory at trifling incidents awakes
I've seen the day, and sae hae ye,
Some, housed on beetles' glossy backs,
Across the lake; sequester'd leafy glades,
The lasses, skelpin barefit, thrang,
I hae been east, I hae been west,
I turn'd the weeder-clips aside,
Perhaps I loved it well; and should I lay
For you, right rev'rend Osnaburg,
To confound the poor doctor at ance.
No matter--stick to sound believing.
With stride colossal, on from hall to hall;
We think na on the lang Scots miles,
That just habitual scorn, which could contemn
Ruin's wheel has driven o'er us,
The hungry bike did scrape and pike,
With love, and kept all phantom fear aloof
His prayer he saith, this patient, holy man;
They, with the meanest, fade and die,
O sovereign power of love! O grief! O balm!
No two virtues, whatever relation they claim,
Weeping themselves away, till they infuse
How to consummate all. The youth elect
Miltonian storms, and more, Miltonian tenderness;
To him that wintles in a halter:
I ken the devils darena touch me.
Above them hangs the maple tree,
Let warlocks grim, an' wither'd hags,
'Tis not the surging billow's roar,
The World--the same wide den--of thieves, or what ye will.
Alpheus! thou enchanter! every sense
Or sweeping, wild, a waste of snows:
Whyles mice and moudiewarts they howkit;
Where the sweet briar smells so sweet agen;
The landlady and Tam grew gracious;
Little trotty wagtail he went in the rain,
And pastures spread with hills and rushes,
Infants, the children of the Spring!
Soon shall thy voice be lost amid the throng
There's no one knows, as I have said,
Of shapeless Chaos. Say, doth the dull soil
But Davie, lad, ne'er fash your head,
Then down ye'll hurl, deil nor ye never rise!
Thro' the woods the whirlwinds rave;
An' could behave hersel wi' mense:
And humblest gig through sundry suburbs whirl,
The pithy bunch of unripe nuts to seek,
An' next my auld acquaintance, Nancy,
That throb, Eliza, is thy part,
Tho' stars in skies may disappear,
Few earthly things found favour in his sight
For as he lifted up his eyes to swear
And makes the old crow's nest an easy chair.
Maun please the great folk for a wamefou;
As lightsomely I glowr'd abroad,
The cleanest corn that e'er was dight
He deems it sin to sing, yet not to say
Though sweet as sleep with health
Again exalt the brute and sink the man;
At every nod and signal of distress,
"And we have always used him well;
And here's the flower that I love best--
To make our harvest cart like so many working folk,
An inward stir of shadowed melody.
Yes, every god be thank'd, and power benign,
Small help, and, after marriage such as mine,
Our Peerage he o'erlooks them a',
Showing no visible sign, for such things are untold.
And once, above the edges of our nest,
That bites and stings when few perceive;
The shrieks of the conquered, the conquerors' yell;
Fresh feeres will dry the bright blue eyes
I see thee now with little hand
Of Stuart, a name once respected,
Pensive, and full of painful jealousies
I knew na where to lodge till day.
They would be blest that saw that.
Through wilderness, and woods of mossed oaks;
Plunderer of armies, lift thine eyes,
His lips with joy they burr at you,
The starry Galileo, with his woes;
They coil'd and swam; and every track
Or silly sheep, wha bide this brattle
When soars Gaul's Vulture, with his wings unfurled,
But soon, with proud parade, the noisy drum
Yet for his life he cannot tell
Tasting of Flora and the country green,
From pain and toil, there would they build and be,
The clouds were pure and white as flocks new shorn,
And his continual voice was pleasanter
That was before our brows were taught to frown,
--On the slope of a mountain I stood;
Where sacred Time with pilgrim feet
And apples, wan with sweetness, gather thee,--
As from thy threshold; day by day hast been
And gloriously she'll whang her
Knows thee not, thus afflicted, for a God;
Her lost militia fir'd her bluid;
Poor, lonely Niobe! when her lovely young
Where the real effigy of midnight hags,
But build a castle on his head,
And oft of cruelty the sky accused;
And dance about the water in the shade.
The crow sat on the willow tree
The fruitful top is spread on high,
And I maun cross the raging sea;
Reflected beams dwell in the streams,
So silently, it seems a beam of light
To any man on earth he will not stoop
For there my boyhood used to dream.
I turned aside to pay my homage here;
Of youthful sports was on thy breast to be
Blind chance, let her snapper and stoyte on her way;
In mockery of man's art; and these withal
The sycamore all withered in the sun.
Of Iris, when unfading it doth shew
Alas! misfortune stares my face,
Amang thae wild mountains shall still be my path,
To your dimpled arms. Once more sweet life begin!"
For comedy abroad he need nae toil,
So, when the storm the forests rends,
Sing on, sweet thrush, upon the leafless bough,
That rocked thee like a cradle in thy root--
Attir'd as minstrels wont to be.
Flow gently, sweet Afton! among thy green braes,
And some, the pride of Coila's plains,
The air was cooling, and so very still.
That in this moment there is life and food
I doubt na, whyles, but thou may thieve;
Welcome the hour, my aged limbs
Auld cantie Coil may count the day,
And on his back a fay reclined voluptuously.
Full of calm joy it was, as I of grief;
In Britain's court kept up the game:
Like to bubbles when rain pelteth.
I saw a third--I heard his voice:
And the Twain were playing dice;
With sanest lips I vow me to the number
At which I sigh'd that I could not pursue,
Banners on high, and battles  passed below;
All the bright riches of my crystal coffer
Who call'd her verse, a parish workhouse made
So I straightway began to pluck a posey
To tell the truth, they seldom fash't him,
'Tis the mind that shines in ev'ry grace,
Nature gladdening and adorning;
Be homely and be peaceful, undeplored
Thou crystal streamlet with thy flowery shore,
A thought which once was his--if on ye swell
From labour could not wean them,
(Born beneath some remote inglorious star)
On sands, or in great deeps, vermilion turn
--He hears a noise--he's all awake--
And made all gentle sounds tell back the tale
More wildering than all that hoarse affright;
And your friends they dae grunt you nae mair.
Ere he'd soak at the swipes--and he turned him to start,
That we lost, did I say? nay, by Heav'n, that we found;
I saw thee leave their evening joys,
Rich marbles, richer painting--shrines where flame
And heath, and thistle, thinly sprinkled o'er,
Till Glory's self is twilight, and displays
Through the wide forest--a most fearful tone,
First onwards in, among the fallen tribe.
Which brought this judgment: so the youth was seized
Meg fain wad to the barn hae gaen,
But meeting her blue orbs! Who, who can write
Making thy waves a blessing as they flow
Not in the fabled landscape of a lay,
Which sages and keen-eyed astrologers
To these what Tory hosts oppos'd,
Want only of wisdom denied her respect,
And come as ye were na comin' to me.
Saw ye not whom the reeking sabre smote,
For what there may be worthy in these rhymes
'Twas worth your while, though in the dark,
And then the water, into stubborn streams
The parents, partial, eye their hopeful years;
But to grant the maidenhead's the devil
And ceased her tale, and listened to the rain,
Our countrymen were warring on that day!"
Watering the heart whose early flowers have died,
In mid-wood silence, thus, how sweet to be;
My youth's returned to fair Strathspey,
She's happy here, she's happy there,
Immortal, starry; such alone could thus
"For our ramgunshoch glum gudeman
The colours all inflam'd throughout her train,
Leans oer its little brig to look
With solemn step an awful Goddess came,
And kindred of dead husband are at best
Her face wad fyle the Logan-Water--
But soon I saw that my own flesh
Thy girning laugh enjoys his pangs
When heavy, dark, continued a'-day rains,
A wight that will weather damnation,
The rebel three.--Thea was startled up,
And the earth conceals sae lowly;
Then whiskey Jean spak o'er her drink,
Like to the fabled Cytherea's zone,
Who never caused a heart to mourn,
They mourn, but smile at length--and, smiling, mourn:
Spring, like their fathers, up to prop
Whose root is Earth--whose leaves and branches be
More pointed still we make ourselves,
Then swops away. From mossy barn the owl
My heart was caught before I thought,
Starts slow and flaps his melancholy wing,
The deep prophetic fulness of this verse,
There was a painful change, that nigh expell'd
Often with more than tortured lion's groan
My sight right upward: but it was quite dazed
Such heart did once the poet bless,
Yet, if the wind breathe soft, the curling waves,
He of the breast which fain no more would feel,
and never noises now of dirty floors
I took compassion on her, bade her steep
Flocks, whose rich fleece right well the trader knows--
On this delight; for, every minute's space,
The children steal away to bed,
But, long ere noon, succeeding clouds
Their worthless nievfu' of a soul
In Santa Croce's  holy precincts lie
'Bout vines, an' wines, an' dru'ken Bacchus,
And when clouds vanished made thy shade amends--
With awe of purity--no Cupid pinion
To hide themselves in forms of beast and bird.
Bill and mittens, lie ye there!
Why will ye thus my suit repel?
The wind blew as 'twad blawn its last;
But still she never heeds what praise can say,
And said, "Art thou so pale, who wast so bland
Nor yet, alas! the dreadful work is done;
Strange journeyings! Wherever beauty dwells,
How it could ever have been young,
And the wretch his true-born brother,
I gaed to the tryste o' Dalgarnock,
The little Maid would have her will,
O' witching love, in luckless hour,
She loved dumb things: and ere she had begun
O'er a' the ills o' life victorious.
Herself more sweetly rears the babe she bears
His spirit pass'd beyond its golden bourn
Since she is fitted to her fancy;
An' durk an' pistol at her belt,
Where are the joys I have met in the morning,
Wherefore more proudly does the gentle knight,
Or where auld-ruin'd castles, gray,
From what has been, or might be, things which grow
Well, sir, from the silent dead,
The language of my former heart, and read
And thought to leave her far away behind;
How this new play an' that new sang is comin'?
Wha's more o' the black than the blue;
And pleasure is a wanton trout,
In the dull catalogue of common things.
When all the stars shone clear and bright,
Still sounded in my ears, when I no more
That straw where many a rogue has lain of yore,
Lo! I must tell a tale of chivalry;
Bid man be valiant ere he merit such:
Who's yon, that, near the waterfall,
To trust, fair Madeline, to no rude infidel."
Into a sober pleasure, when thy mind
O Lord! yestreen thou kens, wi' Meg--
The Souter tauld his queerest stories;
And decks the lily fair in flow'ry pride,
Freedom's sword will strongly draw,
But cracks of work, of horses and of plough.
Save that wherein at last they crumble bone by bone?
Gush ever and anon with silent creep,
High o'er the cliffs I led my fleecy store,
Besides, for all his love, in self despite,
From Jove to Jesus--spared and blest by Time--
In the cold moonshine. Straight he seiz'd her wrist;
Shining dim-powdered with a downy blue,
Your bonnie face sae mild and sweet
Of that fine element that visions, dreams,
And set those old Chaldeans to their tasks.--
Dried carefully on the cooler side of sheaves
There are who lord it o'er their fellow-men
Aye, once a stranger blest the earth
And, patient, as a hen-bird, sat her there
O aching time! O moments big as years!
And sail about the world to scenes unheard
Come, hear the woodland linnet,
Here's to thy health, my bonnie lass,
The sky was blue, the wind was still,
"--Then ask not wherefore, here, alone,
Or lasses gie my heart a screed,
To feed the crow on Talavera's plain,
And, in the middle, there is softly pight
And fools despise the blessing sent,
But there is crime--a brother's bloody knife!
The owlet leaves her hiding-place at noon,
And all her silken flanks with garlands drest?
The pleasant day, upon a couch at ease.
'Twas when the stacks get on their winter hap,
With none who bless us, none whom we can bless;
They sound as through the whispering of trees,
That deep-brow'd Homer ruled as his demesne;
Had died in mutual arms devout and true,
Yet were these Florentines as self-retired
And broad as a weft upon the left
For a' the lee-lang simmer's day
There is society, where none intrudes,
Why didst thou hear her prayer? O that I
Far from the earth away--unseen, alone,
'Gainst such an host what flinty savage dares--
Thus ending, on the shrine he heap'd a spire
I would not feign a single tale
And once, while among mortals dreaming thus,
Of Bacchus from his chariot, when his eye
While thro' the braes the cushat croods
And but for you I might despair'd of.
Icing the Pole, or in the torrid clime
And Betty listens, glad to hear it.
All stiff with ice the ashes lie;
Ere thou canst say "they're gone,"
Is to the mellow Earth as Autumn to the year.
"Where are those lights so many and fair
And cuddled me late and early, O!
And would be something if he knew but how;
Of men to herd with Man, with whom he held
Oft have our fearless fathers strode
From the quaint mossiness of aged roots:
Their wisdom long since fled.--Two wings this orb
The voice of woe and wild despair;
Until impatience cannot see or hear
And follow my love thro' the water.
Till the balls like pulses beat;
He left the foul business to folks less divine.
Who are these coming to the sacrifice?
Five hundred white stots I'll gie you,
This leaves us well in health thank God for that
The which I breathe away, and thronging come
The Convoy spread like wild swans in their flight,
And cool themselves among the em'rald tresses;
Delicious symphonies, like airy flowers,
Yet een from him she shuns a rude embrace,
Quo' she, a sodger ance I lo'd,
Guard wherever thou canst guard;
To slive her apron corner to her eyes.
The swans, that, when I sought the water-side,
As thine ideal breast; whate'er thou art
There is a stern round tower of other days
But love is far a sweeter flower
"I love my love" the ploughman sung,
To keep, at times, frae being sour,
More like the fountain of an infant sea
Moved either host. On a wide sand they met,
At length we had a hearty yokin'
Not therefore veiled quite, blindfold, and hid,
And hateful thoughts enwrap my soul in gloom;
For I could lay my bread and kail
The Niobe of nations! there she stands,
Sin' I could striddle owre a rig;
There's just the man I want, i' faith!"
What next? A tuft of evening primroses,
Of sparkling Helicon:--small good it were
Little recked he of all that Men regret;
The Foe, the Victim, and the fond Ally
Which every elf and fay had come to see:
As something, loudly, in my breast,
The progress of the spiky blade:
And ay she took the tither souk,
My happy love will overwing all bounds!
Till full he dashes on the rocky mounds,
Some fell for wrang, and some for right;
Then let us fight about, Dumourier;
And murmur'd into it, and made melody--
And nurtured in Convulsion! Of thy sire
These are thy fruits, successful Passion! these!
We'll mark the little reeling bee
And winds by the cot where my Mary resides;
Brushing the cobwebs with his lofty plume,
We'll roam through the forest for each idle weed;
And how he died: and then, that love doth scathe,
Mankind are his show-box--a friend, would you know him?
No ease, within doors or without,
And gaze complacent on congenial earth.
But starv'd and died. My sweetest Indian, here,
And, after proper purpose of amendment,
Thou hadst been made to stand or fall alone,
Who wooed thee once, thy Vassal, and became
Waking the teazing insects from their sleep;
At every cottage door mountainous heaps
O Moon! far-spooming Ocean bows to thee,
Through winding alleys; and lo, wonderment!
Want only of goodness denied her esteem
Rave to my darkly-dashing stream,
Trees and bushes were all strangers, the hedges and the lanes,
Of the dome pomp, reflected in extremes,
The bitterness of love: too long indeed,
I'm bizzie too, an' skelpin' at it,
With plain and manifest intent,
For who would humbly serve the poor!
Who gathering round the altar, seemed to pry
The camel labours with the heaviest load,
The Conqueror's sword in bearing fame away!
For me, I'm on Parnassus' brink,
The pride of her kindred the heroine grew;
Prepare, Maria, for a horrid tale
Saturn, sleep on! while at thy feet I weep."
Waits with high marble doors for blood and incense rare.
Tho' poor in gear, we're rich in love,
He answer'd, bending to her open eyes,
While the old cat growls bass with the bellows
Has been an under-passion to this hour.
Him whom she loves, her idiot boy.
Shall I say 'Crouch!'--Ye groan. What can I then?
Then starts and grins and drives the crowd agen;
By telling how the sea-born goddess pin'd
As Youth and Love with sprightly dance
We rest in silence, like two gems upcurl'd
Cheats us into a swamp, into a fire,
Who may forget how well thy walls have stood?
Ye Gallants braw, I red you a',
I'll lay me with th' inglorious dead,
Sheathed in his form the deadly weapon lies.
Of their great agony, wrung out from this
Aye, hadst thou never lov'd an unknown power,
And on his bonnet grav'd was plain,
When Isabella by Lorenzo knelt.
For the mere joy of riding back again,
An' a' the tunes that e'er I play'd,
I wish, I wish, but all in vain,
My blessin's upon thy sweet wee lippie,
Of human cities torture: I can see
_Who_ would be free _themselves_ must strike the blow?
He bids you mind, amid your thoughtless rattle,
Maternal Nature! for who teems like thee,
Count on a friend, in faith an' practice,
I would not kiss thy face again
Unhaunted by the murmurous noise of waves,
I am nae stranger to your fame,
Thence peasants, farmers, native sons of earth,
But mist a fit, an' in the pool
Is twenty years behind the march of mind.
The arches, striding o'er the new-born stream;
And warm with dew at ooze from living blood!
Nor greetings where no kindness is, nor all
Its strife I cannot bear to see,
Thou nameless column  with the buried base!
In poortith I might make a fen';
And then the rolling thunder gets awake,
Has broken nature's social union,
And never may their sources fail!
Sometimes by friends forsaken, O,
And back-bite neighbours bout the town--
'Tis to create, and in creating live
The lead and buoy are needful to the net;
And strikes the ever-deep'ning tones,
Along the banks where smiling Arno sweeps
Lord send you ay as weel's I want ye,
To the bare trees, and mountains bare,
With rapture to the other side of the world!
An Emperor tramples where an Emperor knelt;
Where Cybele and the bruised Titans mourn'd.
In Poosie-Nansie's held the splore,
And underneath the wide o'erarching gate
Twins monie a poor, doylt, druken hash,
Ask nought so heavenward, so too--too high:
With which, though bent on haste, myself I deck'd;
We'll ease our shanks an' tak a seat,
Burns in thee, child?--What good can thee betide,
And clung upon her smiles as a bee upon a flower,
Wild send thee pleasure's devious way,
And if it please thee, Power above,
No majesty that shall not pass away?
In anxious secrecy they took it home,
Oh, more or less than man--in high or low--
The plains, that seem without a bush or tree,
Or what wad mak her weel again.
Fire-branded foxes to sear up and singe
In's hand five taper staves as smooth's a bead,
Thou whose bright sun now gilds yon orient skies!
They're maistly wonderfu' contented:
To mark the sweet flowers as they spring;
And claps old Dobbin's hide, and potters back.
Of upcast eye, and tender pondering!
"And must we then part from a dwelling so fair?"
I'd just dropt asleep when I dreamed Robin spoke,
This fire, like the eye of gordian snake,
To one who travels from the dusking East:
To sooth the cares, and lift the thoughts of man.
And then, what limbs those feats have left
Which like as footboys on her actions wait,
But Peace abhorreth artificial joys,
The waters of the pond to shake,
O tell me, does she muse on me?
Then leave the naked brain: be still the leaven,
Upon some breast more lily-feminine.
One point must still be greatly dark,
Than I, no lonely hermit plac'd
Our destinies o'erleap their mortal state,
But the songster's nest within the bush
Wild--wanton, kiss'd her rival breast;
And offering shelter ever still and warm
White is the glassy deck, without a stain,
Come thou who giv'st with all a courtier's grace;
It was the scene which Passion must allot
His bosom grew, when first he, far away,
The purple west, and, two bright streaks between,
Tam lo'ed him like a vera brither;
To some lone spirits who could proudly sing
Where blazoned glare names known to chivalry,
Before the Water-Monarch. Nectar ran
He has no calling and he owns no trade.
Delight you? Did ye never cluster round
Thy free-born men should spare what once was free;
The girl that's buried there I knew her well,
And diamond-paved lustrous long arcades,
And tweets and flies from every passer-bye.
Moanings had burst from him; but now that rage
The dull satiety which all destroys--
When she was on the mountain high,
To search for thee, divine Endymion!
There, well-fed Irwine stately thuds:
Ne vacant space for lated wight is found:
And him a wise man who could manage well.
No doubt too he the moon had seen;
By the first beams of dawning light impress'd,
Down where the shallower wave still tells its bubbling tales.
Chose one who should owe it all, d'ye see,
What aspects, old Time, in his progress, has worn!
Or like stout Cortez when with eagle eyes
Thou formest in his fortunes bids us think
To the soft side of the heart, or wisely bar
And they started up and barked as my shadow they espied.
That he intends to pay your debt,
I sue not for my happy crown again;
And they shall bring thee taper fishing-rods
Nocht of ill may come thee near,
And there I witnessed in the sunny hours
Is, the clear fountains' interchanging kisses.
Sighs in the gale, keeps silence in the Cave,
In vain the burns cam' down like waters,
For oh! her lanely nights are lang;
And the waves bound beneath me as a steed
Did but of Rome's best Son remind her more:
Of wavy grass, and reads a debonair
But now that time is gone and past.
And fairies, like a rising spark,
Much have I traveled in the realms of gold,
But the godly old chaplain left him in the lurch,
And scarcely any where they go.
Has blest me with a random shot
That thou mayst always know whither I roam,
I started up, when lo! refreshfully,
I turned from all she brought to those she could not bring.
Doubt truth to teach thee wrong,
Mild, calm, serene, wide spreads the noontide blaze,
And whiskey Jean, that took her gill
Woman! when I behold thee flippant, vain,
To meet the cooler air and walk an angel there,
Your pleasures safe as under lock and key.
With sorrow and supineness, and so die;
As page and slave anon were passing out and in.
O come thy ways to me, my Eppie M'Nab!
Mary, I'm thine wi' a passion sincerest,
That day ye pranc'd wi' muckle pride,
And hands the rustic stranger up to fame,
His name upon the harp-string, should achieve
The swallow jinkin round my shiel,
and Gip for kindness get a double pay
Into most lovely labyrinths will be gone,
By yon burn-side, gin ye maun ken,
Till its echoes depart; then I sink to repose.
He was a Poet, sure a lover too,
That nane can be sae dear to me
His paces back into the temple's chief;
Lodge like pearls upon his back.
And gripe, and deepening of the dragon's grasp,
To get the prize--and earnest half and jest
Of spanning wisdom; though I do not know
"Another year is gone for ever."
When wretches range, in famish'd swarms,
Or raise the writhing lip with ill-dissembled sneer.
Her evenings then were dull and dead;
Let me have music dying, and I seek
Well didst thou speak, Athena's wisest son!
Felt in the blood, and felt along the heart,
And such the storm of battle on this day,
The helmsman steerd, the ship mov'd on;
But she's been gone some ten years since, and I know not what to do.
The mother may forget the child
My herald thought into a wilderness:
The few last rays of their far-scattered light,
But vain they search'd, when off I march'd
And offered from my heart to thine!
Thy shepherd vest, and woo thee mid fresh leaves.
"Farewell hours that late did measure
Throws light on darkness with excessive skill,
Brisk Confidence still best with woman copes:
Tyrants in vain their powers secure,
And shake again the world, the Thunderer of the scene!
She knows not, happy Betty Foy!
They'd fain have him shove, but he looked at his clothes
Till I could not bear to look at light:
The yellowhammer, trailing grass, will come
My pleasant days, because I could not mount
Flower, tree, and bush, like all the shadows grey,
While every eye saw me my hair uptying
Or I will, even in a moment's space,
Their visage, wither'd, lang, an' thin,
Yet that was never Robin's mark
The thistle-down's flying, though the winds are all still,
Tho' nabobs, yet men of the first,
Hath aught like thee in Truth or Fancy seemed:
Possessing the one shall imply you've the other.
As Queensberry buff and blue unfurl'd,
At dawn, when ev'ry grassy blade
But kind still, I'll mind still
That night, a child might understand,
And twang'd it inwardly, and calmly said:
Athwart the sallows of a river nook
Thy auld danm'd elbow yeuks wi' joy,
Upon their summer thrones; there too should be
But no--already had his deathbell rung;
Would come in these like accents; O how frail
Yet this is vain--O Mathew lend thy aid
Yet such a head, and more the heart,
My father was a good and pious man,
Thee for enlivening all the cheerful eyes
If neist my heart I dinna wear ye
Dear goddess, help! or the wide-gaping air
What I can ne'er express--yet can not all conceal.
An' thy auld days may end in starvin,
Sad to your sympathetic scenes I fly;
Now he is sitting by a shady spring,
He saw her body fading gaunt and spare
In tears the rosebuds steeping!
If you rattle along like your mistress's tongue,
And one that may for wiser piper pass,
Come autumn sae pensive, in yellow and gray,
Became alike thy fostering care.
Alas! (thought I, and my heart beat loud)
Thus with half-shut suffused eyes he stood,
One moon, with alteration slow, had shed
Is chained and tortured--cabined, cribbed, confined,
From the clear space of ether, to the small
Told him I came to feast my curious eyes;
And wrong are accidents, and Men grow pale
Nought heeding that our friendship was betrayed,
Not even to view the heavenly choir
The bellowing of cows with udders full
Now comes the pain of truth, to whom 'tis pain;
Though in the village still; as friends and kin
Their hopes were not less warm, their souls were full as brave.
O, bitter mock'ry of the pompous bier,
Forward he stoop'd over the airy shore,
When first my senses caught their tender falling.
Now, where the swift Rhone cleaves his way between
As if one quick and sudden Gale had swept
To deck her gay, green-spreading bowers;
His hands against his face, and then did rest
To chase the glowing Hours with flying feet--
His worth might be sample for a'.
I'll learn my kin a rattlin' sang,
Dream, and so dream all night without a stir,
Dart follows dart--lance, lance--loud bellowings speak his woes.
The woes of Troy, towers smothering o'er their blaze,
And palpitations sweet, and pleasures soft,
I move to the end in lowliness of heart.--
Some sing the pomps of chivalry
That can inform the mind, or mend the heart,
To every symbol on his forehead high;
Thou, simmer, while each corny spear
Awake, ye Sons of Spain! awake! advance!
But thou must nip this tender innocent
Outvieing all the buds in Flora's diadem.
Of diverse passion; when her lips and eyes
My parents do nothing but scold;
Shrewd Willie Smellie to Crochallan came,
And claim a kindred with you; for ye are
And talks with echo as he drives along;
He play'd a spring, and danc'd it round,
Along the sheep tracks' beaten ways,
Among immortals when a God gives sign,
Let his divinity o'er-flowing die
Now homeward-bound, the hedger bundles round
By the dim echoes of old Triton's horn:
For deep the grass and bushes lie below,
Unheeded, searching through the crowd to find
The lassie lost a silken snood,
When wearied on my little wing!
Where scarce a sunbeam to molest her steals--
"Hence Fullarton, the brave and young;
Burr, burr--now Johnny's lips they burr,
Be't whisky gill, or penny wheep,
And "God is with us" all reply.
Beneath the moon, yet shining fair,
And the book not the waur, let me tell ye;
Far, far away from all the world, more rude than rain or wind,
He breath'd fierce breath against the sleepy portals,
And Miscreator, makes and helps along
To feeling, pensive hearts hae charms!
An' wi' rhetorie clause on clause
Freshness in the green turf that wraps the dead,
From rear to van they scour about the plains;
To watch the abysm-birth of elements.
Whate'er betides, I've known the worst.
Of fortune's polar frost, or torrid beams.
And trees turned bushes half their bodies hide.
Anxious claim their suppering-up.
My heart it shall never be broken for ane.
"O shrieve me, shrieve me, holy Man!"
And even th' abuse of poesy abused!
An' when the gentry's life I saw,
And moonlight; aye, to all the mazy world
But see you The Crown, how it waves in the air!
They could not deem me one of such--I stood
To their gratis grace and goodness.--
Now feebly bends she in the blast,
Thou, Pitt, shalt rue this overthrow;
And other pulses. Hear ye not the hum
The glowing banquet-room shone with wide-arched grace.
And eyes, though thronged with darts to kill,
When wi' an eldritch, stoor quaick--quaick--
Then bouses drumly German water,
'Twas na her bonnie blue een was my ruin;
Oh, open the door, some pity to show,
For he was Freedom's Champion, one of those,
Awa ye squatter'd, like a drake,
Nor shakes her crimson plumage in the skies:
But warl's gear ne'er troubles me,
Nor pour your descant, grating, on my soul;
If he'd still an odd coin in his pocket to melt,
Each day from east to west the heavens through,
And years synsyne hae o'er us run
Where there's nor light nor life to see,
Now while the earth was drinking it, and while
Now, Robinson, harangue nae mair,
She scuds with summer breezes, to pant through
For its own cruel sacrifice, the kind,
That on the banks of this delightful stream
Save darkened Jura,  whose capt heights appear
And as he was singing the tears down came,
The moon put forth a little diamond peak,
And joys that riches ne'er could buy:
Thence countra wives, wi' toil an' pain,
Hae thought they had ensur'd their debtors,
Of vision search'd for him, as one would look
Who cost her mother Tellus keener pangs,
For my firm-based footstool:--Ah, infirm!
Wi' twa white hands she spread it down;
Made of whateer their fancies please;--
Then worthy Glenriddel, so cautions and sage,
Who, with a smile that thrills her soul to view,
To that when further worlds to conquer failed;
What ails ye now, ye lousie b----h,
Of past existence, wilt thou then forget
And aye so fond they of their singing seem
In cottage small and larger farm;
The words come skelpin, rank and file,
She, the fair sun of all her sex,
Not so the rustic--with his trembling mate
And peasant girls, with deep blue eyes,
Of trumpets at clear parley from the east
Yet there are things whose strong reality
As sweethearts' names, and whom they love the best;
With trembling voice I tune my strain
Than Leda's love, and cresses from the rill.
Whistling aloud by guess, to flocks they cannot see.
Strange matters did it treat of, and drew on
Awake, with horrid shout, my foemen's ears,
Ah, could I see that happy hour
And he who, like a blighting blast,
What was this tower of strength? within its cave
Might breed me pain or sorrow, O:
I'll grasp thy waist, and, fondly prest,
Ææa's isle was wondering at the moon:--
She would weep, and he would craze:
Shut out are the green fields and birds in the bushes;
With all my ardours: thou wast the deep glen;
Of emerald deep: yet not exalt alone;
But o'er it in such scenes would steal with transient trace.
And deathless genius only heirs.
Yet the sweet converse of an innocent mind,
Ere the dread thunderbolt could reach? How!
Weel pleas'd the Mother hears it's nae wild, worthless rake.
An' if the wives an' dirty brats
And owre the moorland whistles shrill;
And, faith, to me 'twas really new!
That wakes thro' the green-spreading grove,
What makes the youth sae bashfu' and sae grave;
Trac'd by thy lov'd Libertas; he will speak,
That tend thy bidding, I do think the bars
That their white powdered branches shield,
Saturn sat near the Mother of the Gods,
Still in prayers for King George I most heartily join,
And warm them into singing moods.
Though friendless now, will dream it had a friend.
And why it flourish'd, as by magic touch;
Still it's owre true that ye hae said,
The warly race may drudge an' drive,
So helping a thirsty old friend in his need
Soon, soon shall Conquest's fiery foot intrude,
That love should be my bane! Ah, Scylla fair!
And, as the flames along their faces gleamed,
A vaulted dome like Heaven's, far bespread
While clouds above him in wild fury boil,
Some tale of love and arms in time of old.
And over the hush'd carpet, silent, stept,
(For one who hath no friend, no brother there)
Thus far have I proceeded in a theme
Which living waves where thou didst cease to live,
Of all the unhealthy and o'er-darkened ways
Said he, "will all this gush of feeling pass
And ey'd the gathering storm, man;
To those whose admiration shall succeed,
Yet are thy skies as blue, thy crags as wild;
To sigh out sonnets to the midnight air!
A stone thrown upward to the sky
Some start awa' wi' saucy pride,
While his enkindled eyes, with level glance
'Tis then I wake to life, to light, and joy.
The which she fills with visions, and doth dress
And friendliness the nurse of mutual good.
Wild weeds are gathering on the wall;
She then her half-told tales will leave
And then my blood rushed to my face
But dreary tho' the moments fleet,
A dreary morning once I fled away
And some are hearing, eagerly, the wild
In all the pomp of method and of art,
Oh! scenes in strong remembrance set!
And Peggy's gone, all clad in silks--
Cold as a bubbling well; let faint-lipp'd shells,
Till Suthron raise, and coost their claise
Vesper, the beauty-crest of summer weather;
Saw the discoloured Rhine beneath its ruin run.
The boy that stands and kills the black nosed bee
Along the mirror'd walls by twin-clouds odorous.
First to be free and last to be subdued;
Shine on the ev'ning o' his days;
O Willie, come sell your fiddle,
Out went the taper as she hurried in;
Visions of all places: a bowery nook
'Deem'st thou I tremble for my life?
His master's dead, and no one now
Is not like love remembered on;
The hizzies, if they're aughtlins fawsont,
Yon valley, that's so trim and green,
By hawthorn tree and foxes' den,
The storm, and through chill aguish gloom outburst
Knows who acts well and whose designs are ill,
Mackinlay, Russell, are the boys,
From housewife cares a minute borrow--
So pert and useless, that they bring to mind
Ere yet one footstep shows in all the sky,
You see the glimmer of the stream beneath,
Let me awhile thy sweetest comforts borrow:
He learned to fear in his own native wood.
And strain for glory when thy die was cast.
Again I look'd, and, O ye deities,
Fate gave the word, the arrow sped,
An' aff the godly pour in thrangs,
More healthful than the leafiness of dales?
Tho' deil haet ails them, yet uneasy;
Its fiery vigil in her single breast;
One thought beyond thine argent luxuries!
Oh, wert thou in the cauld blast,
Unfaded amaranth, when wild it strays
So pushes off his boat most eagerly,
When by my solitary hearth I sit,
What sighs and vows amang the knowes
Which was, to lead him, in close secrecy,
Her modest demeanour's the jewel of a'!
Her Beauty and her Chivalry--and bright
All prayers are needless, beads they need not tell,
No uttered syllable, or, woe betide!
My sooth! right bauld ye set your nose out,
And know that we had parted from all hope.
The bird came for shelter, but soon flew away;
Sad case for such a brain to hold
To me my good friend Matthew spake,
With a sweet inland murmur.[4]--Once again
The dreary intercourse of daily life,
Across the bridge that's in the dale,
Noiseless, sub-marine cloudlets, glittering
Doing his evil will, nor less elate
The quick invisible strings, even though she saw
Yet, teughly doure, he bade an unco bang.
But they who fought are in a bloody shroud,
Or other holy seers that tune the sacred lyre.
Or than the west, made jealous by the smiles
He runs along and bites at all he meets:
Who, when this planet's sphering time doth close,
Its memory of thee; beneath it sweeps
By word, or pen, or pointed steel!
From its fair face, shall bid our spirits fly.
Low in the sheltered valley stands his cot,
That when nae real ills perplex them,
But, when he had refused the proffered gold,
To see wide plains, fair trees and lawny slope:
The vengeance, which shall yet be sought and found--
Than e'er reflected in its pleasant cool,
Came quiet to his eyes; and forest green,
Had done it already; that the dreadful smiles
Full many the glories that brighten thy youth!
Beset with plainful gusts, within ye hear
After so many hours of toil and quest,
As she was wont of old? prepare her steeds,
His little hand, the small forefinger up,
Here Dons, Grandees, but chiefly Dames abound,
Its crowds are solitudes to me.
Hope beaming mild on the soft parting hour;
May secrecy round be the mystical bound,
Where palsy shakes a few, sad, last gray hairs,
The voice of waters--the great bell that heaves
The first from Hope, the last from Vacancy;
With other names, an endless string,
Now, like the hands that reared them, withering:
When gallant Sir Robert, to finish the fight,
And after mony a bloody, deathless doing,
Thy heaven-born radiance around me shed,
The long wild locks that to their girdles streamed,
Hath but _one_ page,--'tis better written here,
and asks about you kindly as our kin
At airy distance, with majestic motion,
See social life and glee sit down,
There I'll spend the day wi' you,
Of a poor three hours' absence? but we'll gain
Where bonnie lasses bleach their claes;
Atween the Russians and the Turks:
With night, and clouds, and thunder--and a Soul
While his proud eye looks through the film of death?
But still keep something to yoursel'
The lamps that from the high-roof'd hall were pendent,
"Why was I not contented? Wherefore reach
There's naethin like the honest nappy!
Then up they gat the maskin-pat,
Their freckled wings; yea, the fresh budding year
And thro' the whins, and by the cairn,
The nightingale is singing now,
And 'mang her favourites admit you!
Adorns the histie stibble-field,
Old ocean rolls a lengthened wave to the shore,
It gave bright gladness to his lady's eye,
But wha blaws best the horn shall win,
Ah, sure no tasteful nook would be without them;
That he, the servant of their trade designs,
Have I not had to wrestle with my lot?
An' swoor fu' rude, thro' dirt an' blood
In melancholy bosoms--such as were
While arching oxeye doubles with his weight.
Sweetly blithe his waukening be!
That happy my dreams and my slumbers may be;
Beneath, a living valley seems to stir;
Doomed to bewail the blasphemy of laws
The march of our existence: and thus I,
And sweet is the lily at evening close;
Twice hast thou ask'd whither I went: henceforth
Ungrateful Florence! Dante sleeps afar,
Nor knew that nests were built. Now a soft kiss--
I was as vague as solitary dove,
The rise of Rapine and the fall of Spain?
Sing on, sweet bird, I listen to thy strain:
An old man, and a female young and fair,
Were they unhappy then?--It cannot be--
Who would not cherish dreams so sweet,
Bows down his summer head below the west.
It is that settled, ceaseless gloom
And seemed to be hearing the poem I read.
On Cessnock banks a lassie dwells;
The cobweb veils are all wet through,
The caird prevail'd--th' unblushing fair
Girt on her mantle and her hose,
Lovely Burns has charms--confess:
To the very tune of love--how sweet, sweet, sweet.
The Latmian started up: "Bright goddess, stay!
Nor wilt, nor canst relieve me;
And more of beautiful and strange beside:
Young Fancy's rays the hills adorning!
Where blithe I turn my spinning-wheel.
So here in distress must I tarry me--
Within a thick and spreading hawthorn bush,
And through whole solemn hours dost sit, and hearken
O meet me at the shed, bonny lassie O!
Rousing elate in these degenerate times;
Well then, I see there is no little bird,
But by guid luck I lap a wicket,
Of girdling mountains intercepts the sight
Give me the stream that sweetly laves
To you I sing, in simple Scottish lays,
There's a holier chase in your view;
Her limbs the polish'd marble stane,
"God save the King!" 's a cuckoo sang
And form'd a snowy circle on the grass,
We'll whistle owre the lave o't.
Maun British wrangs be righted!
Or bright Lapraik's, my friend to be,
But day and night my fancy's flight
A pang, ev'n thou must fail to soothe?
Oh! what's the matter? what's the matter?
For the true laurel-wreath which Glory weaves
Husband and children! one by one, by sword
They'll step in an' tak' a pint
That which is most within me,--could I wreak
Leading afar past wild magnificence,
With treble vengeance will his hot shafts urge
Amid the timbrels, and the throng'd resort
Or that the evening dew had pearl'd their tresses,
While Waterloo with Cannæ's carnage vies,
More boisterous than a lover's bended knee;
The while they pelt each other on the crown
Young, old, high, low, at once the same diversion share.
Thrice happy! that from him the grave did hide
They're patch'd with purple and green.
Of all my lucent empire? It is left
Where we may soft humanity put on,
Some phantom lures, such as we sought at first--
Done heedlessly, those spouting columns rose
That lives at the lug o' the law!
His friends, the dearest. Hushing signs she made,
Endymion too, without a forest peer,
O gin I saw the laddie that gae me't!
Crowned with flowers purple, white, and red:
So free and liberal as thy bounty flows,
When Phoebus peeps over the mountains,
The man's the gowd for a' that!
And I forgot thee, as the berried holly
Alas! too oft condemned for him to bear and bleed.
O, Willie brew'd a peck o' maut,
A' ye wha live by crambo-clink,
To teach Man what he might be, or he ought--
But I lo'e the dear lassie because she lo'es me.
To win three wechts o' naething;
The foolhardy ploughman I well could endure,
Meantime a glorious revelry began
Thus on the banks of thy majestic Rhine?
He told Leoni, that the poor mad youth,
The amorous thrush concludes his sang;
For, oh! my soul is parch'd with love.
'Tis done! says Jove; so ends my story,
And pain my steps upon these flowers too rough,
And bless the dear parental name
When Venice was a Queen with an unequalled dower.
And still, as signs of life appear'd,
"I'll wed another, like my dear
And poplars, and lawn-shading palms, and beech,
He forthright pass'd, and lightly treading went
Thousands on thousands piled are seated round;
Whence that completed form of all completeness?
Each prudent cit a warm existence finds,
Of the loud breakers, and the ceaseless roar
The captive bands may chain the hands,
How lovely, Nith, thy fruitful vales,
And slender kingcup, burnished with the dew
To their spirit's perch, their being's high account,
Scoffing; and apostolic statues  climb
And the horizon throws away its shroud,
Sager than in thy fortunes; for in them
Haunted by holy Love--the earliest Oracle!
He roos'd my waist sae genty sma',
Too many tears for lovers have been shed,
I laid her between me and the wa'--
If ceremonies due they did aright;
Observe the very nowt an' sheep,
And annals graved in characters of flame.
The Soul forgets her schemes of Hope and Pride,
Ye have left your souls on earth!
Yet stood the fair maid nigh me and told me all her love.
In sleep I heard the northern gleams;
A beauteous heap, a hill of moss,
What is it? And to what shall I compare it?
Fell facing their swift flight, from ebon streak,
In Highland bonnet woo Malvina's charms;
And asks the passing stranger what's o'clock,
While the sands o' life shall run.
The stranger might smile but I heeded him not,
The Ocean hath his chart, the Stars their map,
And oft, God rest her, in the fortune-book
Nodding their heads before her goes
And roared or murmured like a mountain stream
Of health by due; where silence dreariest
So on our heels a fresh perfection treads,
And storms like furies pass remorseless by.
Vermilion-tail'd, or finn'd with silvery gauze;
The lee-lang night we watch'd the fauld,
Fluttering among the faint Olympians,
The soul within these orbs burns dry;
No loved-one now in feigned lament could rave;
My hunting cap, because I laugh'd and smil'd,
And shook baith meikle corn and bear,
A mimic temple, so complete and true
As though in Cupid's college she had spent
Those two on winged steeds, with all the stress
Farewell, O Warbler! till to-morrow eve,
When from the dark synod, or blood-reeking field,
Or height, or depth, or width, or any chance
My eyes at once to death: but 'twas to live,
Of circumstance; yea, seize the arrow's barb
With coldness thy inspired song,
"But I shall soon be back again."
Spangled, and rich with liquid broideries
Thou art commission'd to this fated spot
With heaviness; in seasons when I've thought
I care not, not I--let the critics go whistle!
Yet oft, delighted, stops to trace
Thrown by the pitiless world. We next could tell
And my last thoughts would happy be,
To say "joy not too much in all that's bloomy."
Beneath the curved moon's triumphal arch.
That gladden the green earth, and we shall find
Hadst thou liv'd in days of old,
This mighty consummation made, the host
Her fate, to every freeborn bosom dear;
Nae doubt the Auld Light flocks are bleatin';
Fareweel, auld birkie! Lord be near ye,
My wand'ring spirit must no further soar.--
Is instant made no worth a louse,
From peaceful slumber she arose,
And cover'd it with mould, and o'er it set
And grief with grief continuing still to blend,
By sights of ever more deformity!
And come na unless the back-yett be a-jee;
Is changed and solemn, like the cloudy groan
Remorse, spleen, hope, but most of all despair.
Have ye beheld the young God of the Seas,
And nothing to my mind a sweeter pleasure brought.
Her playmate, and her wooer in the shade."
Then in this magic circle raise the dead;--
Ah! surely that light peeps from Vesper's eye,
His first sweet evening yellow.
Then rest when weary on a bank, where not a grassy blade
When I was well, I wished to live,
In body, and become a living soul:
The sagest of usurpers, Cromwell!--he
The rank is but the guinea's stamp,
O, sad and heavy should I part,
Night, where dawn shall never break,
O that's the lass to make him blest.
Shall be my grief, or twinkle me to pleasure.
Peg Nicholson was a good bay mare,
Thou never lap, an' sten't, an' breastit,
That fosters the droop-headed flowers all,
But sure her soul is not in hell,
For pity hide the cruel sentence
Far less to riches, pow'r, or freedom,
And guileless beyond Hope's imagining!
Warm and serene, but yet with moistened eyes
Heaven paints, with hurried hand, wild hues of every dye.
Shall I, like a fool, quoth he,
Syne to the Highlands hame to me.
Roused up the soldier ere the Morning Star;
Among the brotherhood; and, at their glare,
Where, braving angry winter's storms,
Happy is England, sweet her artless daughters;
To shepherds and their flocks; and furthermore,
Ere I can have explored its widenesses.
For faith I'm confoundedly dry;
The Morn is up again, the dewy Morn,
My little boat, for many quiet hours,
To death, she's dearly paid the kane,
I wasted, ere in one extremest fit
To sell her poor Jenny for siller an' lan'!
To her, than noise of trees or hidden rill;
Hail, thou gloomy night of sorrow,
And Laos wide and fierce came roaring by;
And pearls roll off his back like rain.
Some o'er thy Thamis row the ribboned fair,
Whate'er this grief mote be, which he could not control.
But freedom's cottage soon was thrust aside
He'll hae misfortunes great and sma',
Jerusalem is fallen! still thou art in bloom,
And roar'd for more; with many a hungry lick
Their Latin names as fast he rattles
The morning sun shone bright and warm;
And all his love for gentle Lycid drown'd;
Ah me, how I could love!--My soul doth melt
Thro' hostile ranks and ruin'd gaps
Or glaikit Charlie got his nieve in:
There be more marvels yet--but not for mine;
Piteous she look'd on dead and senseless things,
That cowslip-peeps are fit to pull,
Above their heads, and follow them untir'd.--
Is vain, or Ilion, Tyre might yet survive,
Of all the heretical and lawless talk
That steals on the evening each leaf to renew.
Where Mungo's mither hang'd hersel'.
The bars survive the captive they enthral;
Swept out by little folks an hour ago;
Tipt round with silver from the sun's bright eyes.
Thy spheres, and as thy silver proxy shine?
Whare hae ye been sae brankie, O?
Fame bade me go on and I toiled the day long
I kissed and bade my love good bye.
The dame return'd, and whisper'd in his ear
His first touch of the earth went nigh to kill.
Her beams bemock'd the sultry main
From hers, who but with friendship his would meet;
While birds rejoice on every spray--
Full ankle-deep in lilies of the vale.
I marvel much that thou hast never told
Tytler's and Greenfield's modest grace;
Why it is thus, one knows in heaven above:
By the faith you fondly plighted;
The thought thereof is awful, sweet, and holy,
That kept me once thy quiet slave,
Some ca' the pleugh, some herd, some tentie rin
Or, richly brown, ream o'er the brink,
A heapit stimpart, I'll reserve ane
And Eve might from the matted thorn
Some wee short hour ayont the twal,
Right glad was he when he beheld her:
Amid his toil thou gav'st Leander breath;
And the blacksmith he swore, had he but the command,
The drilled dull lesson, forced down word by word
To spread and foam and deluge all the plain.
But I hae ane will tak' my part,
He knows of nothing but the football match,
Wha aiblins, thrang a parliamentin',
Tho' it was sma', 'twas weel-won gear,
I'd kiss her maids, and kick the perverse b----h.
For Meditation fixed at times on him;
Small swipes should bemoisten his gullet no more:
His praise was worth nothing, his censure was poor,
The kernel of his hopes, how more than vile:
By human hands, is not of human thought--
Had I on earth but wishes three,
He bares his forehead to the cool blue sky,
Hallooed "woi" to his horses and though it was June
And of thy lilies, that do paler grow
Too well awake, he feels the panting side
Thee into endless heaven. Awake! awake!_
Enjoying comfort that was never penned.
Dying to embers from their native fire!
Frae common sense, or sunk enerv'd
The winds lift up their voices: I depart,
Flowers now sleep within their hoods;
Would still, albeit in vain, the heavy heart divest.
That veni, vidi, vici, is his way;
Oppress'd with grief, oppress'd with care,
The friend whom wild from wisdom's way,
Whyles, o'er the wee bit cup an' platie,
The cat has twa the very colour;
As ta'en thy ain wife Kate's advice!
The Tailor fell thro' the bed, thimbles an' a'.
And the deep thunder peal on peal afar;
Speak, stubborn earth, and tell me where, O where
Last on the road the cowboy careless swings,
O ken ye what Meg o' the Mill has gotten?
He glows with all the spirit of the Bard,
Her fingers he press'd hard, as one came near
A few dear objects, will in sadness feel
Ponderest high and deep; and in thy face
In great and small, in round and square,
An' a' the lang day I whistle and sing,
The auld kirk-hammer strak' the bell
Ages, but not Oblivion, feebly brave;
As hour-glass sand,--and fast, as you might see
You know when in my father's bower
Creep through the shade with jaunty fluttering,
For by one thoughtless girl that's acted ill
I love the verse that mild and bland
Alas! I'm but a nameless wight,
O that's the lassie o' my heart,
It's now twa month that I'm your debtor
Our piece of heaven--whose benevolence
And partly that I did his Sire some wrong,
And from a purer fount, on holier ground,
Were this the charter of our state,
Dowie she saunters down Nithside,
The deadly feel of solitude: for lo!
There was a youth whom I had loved so long,
His forest wildernesses. I have clung
Farewell to the mountains high cover'd with snow;
A lesson sadly teaching, to your cost,
Extreme in all things! hadst thou been betwixt,
Nor livelier Satirist the conscience pierce,
They lay aside a' tender mercies,
Puzzled those eyes that for the centre sought;
Earnestly round as wishing to espy
Nae honest worthy man need care
And of his fame forgetful! so his fame
On with the giddy circle, chasing Time,
Perhaps it may turn out a sang,
Ever lonely in crowds, in Nature's own laws--
Of Phillis to muse and to sing.
Trumpets sound, and cannons roar,
Which glows yet smoother from his amorous clutch!
Been there to hear this heavenly band engage,
My secret heart's exulting boast?
In vengeance, gloating on another's pain.
"Our stibble-rig was Rab M'Graen,
We freely wad exchang'd the wife,
Just now we're living sound and hale,
Alas! 'tis his old grief. For many days,
The turkey gobbles loud and drops his rag
Save o'er some warrior's half-forgotten grave,
Are turned to one white sweep of curving hills,
If looks speak love-laws, I will drink her tears,
Wi' your "liberty's chain" and your wit;
No wonder I'm fond of a sodger laddie.
Weel mounted on his gray mare, Meg,
Poured in her lap all gems in sparkling showers.
With aught beneath him, if he would preserve
Year after year my stock it grew,
Filling the chilly room with perfume light.--
My child! they gave thee to another,
In simmer, when the hay was mawn,
His rosy eloquence, and thus inquired:
What ragings must his veins convulse,
Athwart a flood of crystal. On a ridge
Beyond the seeming confines of the space
Blushing through the mist and dew,
And fare thee weel, my only luve!
And certes, in fair virtue's heav'nly road,
The love of millions! How we did entrust
Wide glaring for revenge!"--As this he said,
He climbs till all the fields are blea and bare
What tho' they ca' me fornicator,
The fool of false dominion--and a kind
For kissin' Theniel's bonnie Mary.
Three volleys let his mem'ry crave
At Neptune's feet he sank. A sudden ring
And snort to meet the prickly sight;
But Pride congealed the drop within his ee:
Paled in and vineyarded from beggar-spies;
Michael in arms, and more, meek Eve's fair slenderness.
But there it streams, and richly reams,
Then did I try, in vain, the crowd's resort,
Who joys to see us with his gifts agreeing,
And of the Bear has Pollux mastery:
So many Nightingales: and far and near
Ye Jacobites by name, give an ear;
Guid faith, he maunna fa' that!
Black grows the southern sky, betokening rain,
Till bairn's bairns kindly cuddle
You're welcome to despots, Dumourier;
A ray of Immortality--and stood,
Which we should see but for these darkening boughs,
I've dar'd his face, and in this place
And glowing into day: we may resume
Perchance she died in age--surviving all,
On man and man's research could deign do more than smile.
Onward these myriads--with song and dance,
To confound the poor doctor at ance,
Even to a moment's filling up, and fast
The grass; I feel the solid ground--Ah, me!
His worth, his honour, all the world approv'd,
Watering the tree which bears his Lady's name
And e'en for change of scene would seek the shades below.
Or haply lies beneath th' Atlantic roar.
(Hey, and the rue grows bonnie wi' thyme),
(Unless aside thy Purple had been thrown)
Nor will I be, like Sampson, led
An' monie an anxious day, I thought
The Centaur's arrow ready seems to pierce
When love-lorn hours had left me less a child,
Of a swallow's nest-door, could delay a trace,
And pledge me in the generous toast--
What is it that hangs from thy shoulder, so brave,
O rivers, forests, hills, and plains!
O the evening's for the fair, bonny lassie O!
Aquarius! to whom king Jove has given
My minnie does constantly deave me,
Saving of thy sweet self; if thou think'st well
On either side outgush'd, with misty spray,
With her o'er half the lovely heaven; but still
And if it be Prometheus stole from Heaven
O, not so idle: for down-glancing thence
God is their parent, and they need no tear;
Together had he left his mother fair
O Tinkler Madgie was her mither;
When winter nights did darkly prove,
Of mighty strength, since Albion was allied,
Till, fled each hope that once his bosom fir'd,
From chaos and parental darkness came
On this ane's dress, an' that ane's leuk,
Then turn we to her latest Tribune's name,
He all the country could outrun,
Young men, and maidens at each other gaz'd
In thae auld times, they thought the moon,
Shall fade before death's lightest stroke,
But not ta'en out. Why, there was not a slope
Wad ever grac'd a dance of witches!
I'll miss thee sporting o'er the dewy lawn,
Look up, and let me see our doom in it;
Ye hills! near neebors o' the starns,
When hushed to silence by the lifted hand
Peggy said good morning and I said good bye,
With Dante or with Milton to regions high,
Without a gap, yet ne'er before had seen
Aye, by that kiss, I vow an endless bliss,
M'Murdo  and his lovely spouse,
There is a very life in our despair,
Afloat, and pillowing up the majesty
The wealthy we slaughtered, the lovely we spared.
The last sad cape-stane of his woes;
Adieu to thee, fair Rhine! How long delighted
And forgot all his passion and toil in a trice.
Majesties, sovran voices, agonies,
O, Jenny, dinna toss your head,
Prepared to start, she soodles home,
When the hen-bird's wing doth rest
Fu' loud and shrill the frosty wind,
And each one's gentle wrists, with reverence,
Think, for a moment, on his wretched fate,
Into the breezy clouds, to weep and pray
I heard nae mair, for Chanticleer
Neglected garment of her widowhood!
But still they seem in deader green,
That brave Caledonia, the chief of her line,
I thought the garden-rose it far excell'd:
An' no owre auld, I hope, to learn!
Its eyes, though wild, were still all dewy bright
Of sanctuary splendour, not a sight
She turned, she toss'd herself in bed,
And tho' wi' crazy eild I'm sair forfairn,
Can on thy Chloris shine, love.
She lifts the knocker, rap, rap, rap,
Making our comfort feel as sweet again;
Tropes, metaphors and figures pour,
Say, may I be for aye thy vassal blest?
Wha should swing in a rape for an hour.
While little sounds of life are round me knelling,
And struggles through the weeds
Molehills and rabbit tracks that lead
And here's to them, that, like oursel,
And he stampt till another fell off and made two:
Then aught in the world beside--Jessy!
In this strange spot, in days gone bye
Divine ye were created, and divine
Now moths deform in shapeless tatters,
Behold the hall where chiefs were late convened!
And marking sweet flow'rets so fair:
For at the first, first dawn and thought of thee,
And I'm the sov'reign o' Scotland,
The sacred seasons might not be disturb'd.
Of dolphins bob their noses through the brine.
Peep with the moon-beams through the leafy roof,
And Virtue vanquish all, and Murder cease to thrive
But all afoot, the light-limbed Matadore
Within my breast there lives a choking flame--
Such tales as needs must with amazement spell you.
Then with his coat he made essay
Till Cynthia hinted he'd find them next morn.
At vesper's earliest twinkle--they are gone--
Land of lost Gods and godlike men, art thou!
See stern oppression's iron grip,
That the hogshead had grown twice as heavy or more.
And bred in darkness,  lest the Truth should shine
Because ye hae the name o' clink,
Why did poor Glaucus ever--ever dare
And placid eye, young Calidore is burning
I'm wearied with thy painted freaks,
Hope 'springs exulting on triumphant wing,'
Meantime touch piously the Delphic harp,
See! from the rustling scythe the haunted hare
So leant she, not so fair, upon a tusk
'Mang black Gentoos and pagan Turks,
But brave Caledonia in vain they assail'd,
With its own drooping buds, but very white.
Here I live, lone clock-a-clay,
Theban Amphion leaning on his lute:
And Counsel sage, and patriotic Zeal--
That he should be the slave o't!
Observe wha's standing wi' him.
And blude-red wine's the rising sun.
The gray hairs yet stack to the heft:
Or slow distemper or neglected love,
Yet peace, though much himself he mourned,
But the laddie's dear sel' he lo'es dearest of a'.
From pasture hedges, daily puts to rack
For Hannibal's just at your gates.
Such as Columbia saw arise when she
There the huge thistle, spurred with many thorns,
Nor of the dead who rise upon our dreams,
Of Names which unto you bequeathed a name;
His breast was white, his touzie back
And drinks the honey dew of solitude.
For more contented peaceful folk to keep;
Comes up with ripple, and with easy float,
One gallant steed is stretched a mangled corse;
An honest man here lies at rest
In whose dread presence, ere an hour
Bring sad thoughts to the mind.
I'd shelter dear Montgomery's Peggy.
And on her silver cross soft amethyst,
And if I guess'd not so, the sunny beam
O ye wha leave the springs o' Calvin,
Pillow my chin for ever? ever press
Through the valley-depths of shade,
Of Glory's gewgaws shining in the van
At Tyranny's, or direr Pleasure's chain;
Thy current's calmness; oft from out it leaps
Conception to the very bourne of heaven,
I made an open fair confession--
And visit scorching climes beyond the sea;
Roose you sae weel for your deserts,
Where Desolation plants her famished brood
My stern alarum, and unsheath his steel;
Beneath that hill of moss so fair.
But comes frae mang that cursed set
How she might secret to the forest hie;
Homeward bend beneath their load;
My auld auntie Katie upon me takes pity,
And sure enough we all at last shall see
And from the rear diminishing away,--
Then though I drudge thro' dub an' mire
Yet does that burst of woe congeal my frame,
Had pass'd away: no longer did he wage
"But if ye can match her, ye're waur nor ye're ca'd,
One word of wail, whilst others sate and wept,
I've play'd mysel' a bonnie spring,
Tho' scarcely langer than your leg,
Our sinfu' saul to get a claut on
All silent runs the silver Trent,
My soul is to its doom: I would not grieve
All that was for our human senses fitted.
A vast, unbottom'd boundless pit,
Thou didst a span grasp mighty to the last,
Storms came and shook thee many a weary hour,
All other depths are shallow: essences,
Her gentle bosom heave tumultuously.
Upon a misty, jutting head of land--
And, far as mortal eye can compass sight,
From tyranny's empurpled bands;
And todlin down on Willie's mill,
Be happy both of you! for I will pull
And find a many things to please.
Those same full fringed lids a constant blind
Of influence benign on planets pale,
He's carried her hame to his ain hallan-door;
Its ships, its rocks, its caves, its hopes, its fears,--
Here giant weeds a passage scarce allow
Or like one who, in after ages, knelt
Might there have learnt new mysteries of his art;
That Jane's good looks procured her many a gown
Till she had filled her apron full.
"And what's the hill of moss to her?
With all the servile wretches in the rear,
She only heard it and it passes bye.
Guid L--d! but she was quaukin'!
And feel the fame of future years.
An' wi' the lave ilk merry morn
Fell sleek about him in a thousand folds--
The hoarse dull drum would sleep, and Man be happy yet!
A disanointing poison: so that Thea,
The sedge has withered from the Lake
And oer the water crinked the curdled wave,
When it is moving on luxurious wings,
The lightly-jumpin' glowrin' trouts,
Ah! now sma' heart hae I to speel
"I've got a bad wife, sir; that's a' my complaint;
And makes the gazers round about the ring
What his share may be o' care, man?
I'll ne'er forget that happy night,
Than garrin lasses cowp the cran
But never tempt th' illicit rove,
Cynthia! where art thou now? What far abode
The wretch that wad a tyrant own,
He vow'd, he pray'd, he found the maid
I'll do my endeavour to follow her plan;
Its voice mysterious, which whoso hears
Miller brought up th' artillery ranks,
Their golden honeycombs; our village leas
My sovereign vision.--Dearest love, forgive
And sorrow for her love in travels rude.
Oh Love! young Love! bound in thy rosy band,
Spurn the green turf as hateful to my feet?
Or a green hill o'erspread with chequered dress
And a whole age of lingering moments crept
The high, the mountain-majesty of Worth
Thank'd heaven that his joy was never ending;
Had time to keep him in amazed ken,
From eve to morn across the firmament.
And others, like your humble servan',
Which kept as fixedly as rocky marge,
Sweet the tinkling rill to hear;
You're welcome, Willie Stewart;
A little shallop, floating there hard by,
Must look down on the hate of those below.
Great Brahma from his mystic heaven groans,
And pore on Nature's universal scroll
Ye bitterns, till the quagmire reels,
As of a thunder cloud. When arrows fly
By constables, those blackguard fellows,
Proud of the foolish talk, the ale he quaffs,
Had we both perish'd?"--"Look!" the sage replied,
No, he had felt too much for such harsh jars:
All-cheering Plenty, with her flowing horn,
She screams--she cannot move for joy;
Were rippling round her dainty fairness now,
But Gentlemen, an' Ladies warst,
Beneath the milk-white thorn that scents the ev'ning gale."
The cit and polecat stink, and are secure;
Even to the trees. He rose: he grasp'd his stole,
Ane gies them coin, ane gies them wine,
Would tempt her furlongs from the path to seek;
Even then, that moment, at the thought of this,
And proffer up to Heaven the warm request,
Whare hae ye been sae braw, lad?
The birds that ranted in the hedge-row boughs,
Of pale immortal death, and with a pang
That I can never tell what mood is best.
His shadow fades away into Destruction's mass,
Unknowing what my way may thwart,
And so it was, until a gentle creep,
Meekly through billows:--when like taper-flame
When thy friends will miss thee not,
Blythe waukens by the daisy's side,
Pardon this freedom I have ta'en,
Of heaven! O Cynthia, ten-times bright and fair!
The parent's heart that nestled fond in thee,
Amazed were those Titans utterly.
No, rather laugh where others frown
Of a' the thoughtless sons o' man,
The fields I for my bed have often used:
Who would have tamed his Eagles down to flee,
Tho' they should cast the vera sark and swim,
Left the unbalanced scale, great Nemesis!
His bristling beard just rising in its might,
Objects that look'd out so invitingly
Tho' life's a gift no worth receivin'
On her mystic eggs she dwells, with strange writing on their shells,
To swear by a' yon starry roof,
Now gay in hope explore the paths of men:
And then the pattering rain begins to fall,
Besides, the Stewarts were but fools,
Wherein that Image shall for ever dwell--
Who heals life's various stounds,
A Douglas follow'd to the martial strife,
And does she heedless hear my groan?
I little took it as her last good-bye;
For a mortal youth, and how she strove to bind
Its every trifle makes it dear.
I took the way that pleas'd mysel',
Wi' dirk, claymore, or rusty trigger,
If we were not, would seem to smile the less,
In vain ye flaunt in summer's pride, ye groves;
But as he gazed on truth his aching eyes grew dim.
And New-Light herds could nicely drub,
But, ah! those pleasures, loves, and joys,
The precepts sage they wrote to many a land:
'Till a' the seas gang dry, my dear,
The silent-blessing fate, warm cloister'd hours,
And simpered, Tis nuisance to lie on the ground.
How sweetly bloom'd the gay green birk,
He spak o' the darts in my bonnie black een,
Here, in this hand, does mankind stand,
Of mitigation, or redeeming bubble
There's auld Rob Morris that wons in yon glen,
The shouts are France, Spain, Albion, Victory!
Leaps to the honors of a tournament,
Are emblems true of hapless lovers dying:
Of his great summoner, and made retreat
I flatter my fancy I may get anither,
Of incense, breath'd aloft from sacred hills,
And catch soft floatings from a faint-heard hymning;
An' aft he's prest, an' aft he ca's it guid;
Wrench'd his dear country from the jaws of ruin?
Forehead to forehead held their monstrous horns;
ADA! sole daughter of my house and heart?
Was she as those who love their lords, or they
Ye'll get the best o' moral works,
They dwindled, Sir, sad sight to see!
You're welcome, Willie Stewart,
An' some, to learn them for their tricks,
The spouseless Adriatic mourns her Lord,
Wi' people that ken ye nae better.
That we inherit in its mortal shroud--
They'll gie her on a rape a hoyse,
And down the gate in faith they're worse
The Laird, the Tenant, an' the Cotter!
High as the eagles. Like two drops of dew
Himself awhile the victim of distress;
I rede you right gang ne'er at night,
But his sagacious eye an inmate owns:
'Twad be owre lang a tale to tell
For love has bound me hand and foot,
An' brought a paitrick to the grun',
See approach proud Edward's power--
And glad the cotters' quiet toils again.
Nay nay, said the toper, and reeled as he spoke,
And blest with more substantial age.
Sages their solemn een may steek,
Yet both in different colours hide their art,
How we can war, how engine our great wrath!
And shar'd their famish'd scrips. Thus all out-told
He lifted up his stature vast, and stood,
O' gudes, an' gear, an' a' my graith,
Walking upon the white clouds wreath'd and curl'd.
That I, a simple countra bardie,
She drench'd away:--and still she comb'd, and kept
Tell yon guid bluid o' auld Boconnock's
O, how that name inspires my style
Nor made atonement when he did amiss,
Among the woods and copses lose themselves,
(Well do I ween the only virgin there)
The while one hand, that erst upon his thigh
Saving when, with freshening lave,
Be gods of your own rest imperial.
A Tower of Victory! from whence the flight
At glaring watch, perhaps, with ready spears--
Quo' she, an' laughin' as she spak,
Who mourns o'er hours which we no more shall see--
But he dipt his dry beak in the mug once or twice
While legion'd fairies pac'd the coverlet,
A melancholy halo scarce allowed
The howling tempest, till its height and frame
"Susan, we must take care of him,
My heart repeated.--She was gone;
Fie! bring Black Jock, her state physician,
Was there far strayed from mortality.
And fill them high with generous juice,
The kirk and you may tak' you that,
She reduc'd him to dust and she drank up the powder.
An' sheds a heart-inspiring steam;
All banished like the sun where that cloud is passing now
Dost strut, and turn, and stride,
And morning shadows streaking into slimness
Yea! none did love him--not his lemans dear--
"Alas! I feel I am no actor here!"
And faith ye'll no be lost a whit,
And never envy blot their name!
Or worser far, the pangs of keen remorse;
Though sweetly female every part,
But does the work, and oft runs out to play,
For all averr'd, I had kill'd the Bird
While she the inmost of the dream would try.
That there is falsehood in his looks
view his horse-tail  with dread;
Such cool and sorrowful offerings, thou art fond
And filled the neighbouring village with their praise.
And with a would-be roguish leer and wink,
Beyond comparison the worst are those
I wished her my farewell before she closed the door.
A whip by her side and a bonnie side-saddle.
Teeming with odours. Lamia, regal drest,
The object of his journey; he replied
A letter inform'd me that all was to wreck;--
Then, Lord be thankit, I can beg;
Wi' wild, unequal, wand'ring step,
But to his utmost would befriend
Oh joy for me that sight to see!
And dipt again, with the young couple's weight,--
The justling tears ran down his honest face!
And find it is the vainest thing to seek;
Theme of the young, and beacon of the wise,
But pleasures are like poppies spread,
Those winged steeds, with snorting nostrils bold
Or flush'd Aurora in the roseate dawning!
Kings may be blest, but Tam was glorious,
Wilt thou be mine, thou bonny lass?
Ye suit the joyless tenor of my soul.
Keen hope does ev'ry sinew brace;
So anxious for the end, he scarcely wastes
The pang, the curse, with which they died,
Wool-woofed carpets: fifty wreaths of smoke
Grasped in the holy hand of Mystery,
And we will live like king and queen,
The morning precious: beauty was awake!
They hae pierc'd mony a gallant heart;
Dark Muchtar his son to the Danube is sped,
Surrendering his whole spirit, of his song
One climbs a molehill for a bunch of may,
Clear, placid Leman! thy contrasted lake,
Of Saturn, and his guide, who now had climb'd
Ane on th' Auld Brig his airy shape uprears,
The torch shall be extinguished which hath lit
"Does thirst of wealth thy step constrain,
Then Satan has travelled again wi' his pack;
But human bodies are sic fools,
Or wand'ring in the lonely wild;
Faintly are heard the ploughmen at their ploughs,
For none e'er approach'd her but rued the rash deed.
The nightingale had ceas'd, and a few stars
There, dearest Chloris, wilt thou rove
Auld Reekie ay he keepit tight,
Less palpably before me--and the glow
Fresh carved cedar, mimicking a glade
Combined marauders half-way barred egress,
Their hope--their stay--their darling youth,
Nor parson 'lowed to pray, nor bell to chime;
They're ay in less or mair provided;
But sticks and cudgels quickly stop the chace.
And many a varied shore to sail along,
Shall on their softened spirits sink, and move
Shrinking from the gaze of day;
Which ne'er might be repeated; who could guess
And she forgot the stars, the moon, and sun,
Called forth the reaper's rustling noise,
They stood together, chained in deep discourse,
But without some better qualities
Bright to the moon their various dresses glanc'd:
The sailing puddock's shrill "peelew"
Here's a health to them that's awa;
Ay gat him friends in ilka place.
Nae poison'd sour Arminian stank,
Yon mixtie-maxtie queer hotch-potch,
Till earth grew iron--still thy leaves were green.
Their souls did from their bodies fly,--
And no man was so full of glee;
In her dark eye, prophetic of the doom
He swoor by a' was swearing worth,
As were his limbs of life, from that same night.
The world with benefits unknowingly;
My name, she says, is Mistress Jean,
Then at her door the _canty_ dame
Distinct, though darkening with her waning phase;
Then up I gat, an' swoor an aith,
To Art a model--and to him who treads
Give me the groves that lofty brave
For sidelong would she bend and sing
Frightin' awa your deuks an' geese,
A troop of little children garlanded;
Here's the memory of those on the twelfth that we lost!--
That what is not sense must be nonsense,
Strange retribution! now Columbia's ease
We have been loitering long and pleasantly,
And drouthy neebors neebors meet,
"The spirit who 'bideth by himself
And little lambkins wanton wild,
Did ne'er to me sic tidings bring,
Love's silver name upon the meadow's face.
The night-winds sigh, the breakers roar,
An' liv'd like lords and ladies gay;
And if ye canna bite ye can bark.
And now what seas between us roar--
When a' the hills are cover'd wi' snaw,
And hastest thou now to that fair lady's bower?
To see thee, Porphyro!--St. Agnes' Eve!
Nae mair he'll join the merry roar
The muse was a' that he took pride in,
For he through Sin's long labyrinth had run,
Of dying thunder on the distant wind;
The grass below--above the vaulted sky.
Could man but leave thy bright creation so,
Where hearts are prest to hearts in glee,
A new appareling for western skies;
Lang syne, in Eden's bonie yard,
He had been happy; but this clay will sink
Sae tickled Death they could na part:
His lady smiles; delight is in her face;
And will she leave her Sunday beaus
And still to her charms she alone is a stranger--
The stars that show us God is there,
An' ploughmen gather wi' their graith,
The thunder and the storm of praise
they are emerald and beryl, yet nothing more than the dews of the
Thou lav'rock that springs frae the dews of the lawn,
Now here, now there, now out of sight!--
My pride was tamed, and in our grief,
On the eighteenth of October we lay in Bantry Bay,
How far the sallows lean across,
As in a palsied Druid's harp unstrung;
Tell me why thus I rave, about these groves!
Curses upon his head.--I was half glad,
O, whare hae ye been sae braw, lad?
With my own fancies garlands of sweet life,
Death slays and keeps her weapons out of sight.
Her hut was on a cold hill-side,
His dewy rosary on the eglantine."
And through the thickening darkness looks afraid,
Like Trouble wandering to Eternity.
And root from out the soul the deadly weed which cloys?
The thoughts o' thee my breast inflame;
'Twas _self_ and _party_ after all,
That overhung a molehill large and round,
From what it hates in this degraded form,
Where slanting banks are always with the sun
She could ca' us nae waur than we are.
For me your wat'ry haunt forsake?
And secret hung, with poison'd crust,
The hardest gallop mice can run,
Blissfully haven'd both from joy and pain;
Even as a flame unfed, which runs to waste
For Nature's pages glassed by sunbeams on the lake.
My eyes against the heavens, and read again.
Hale breeks, a scone, an' whiskey gill,
The merry plough-boy cheers his team,
The torrents that from cliff to valley leap,
Names, deeds, gray legends, dire events, rebellions,
Half-wauken'd wi' the din, man.
Or why sae sweet a flower as love
I have not loved the World, nor the World me;
A guest to every heart's desire,
They answer and provoke each other's songs--
O'er the far times, when many a subject land
Fire from the mind as vigour from the limb;
And while it died away a shade pass'd by,
Time hears its visions speak,--and age sublime
When all is gone that grew within;
To show this wonder of its gentle might.
We lap and danced the lee lang day,
But 'twould be rude, you know, to ask the question;
Be as it may Futurity's behest,
Lo, from the shades of Death's deep night,
"Come home again, whate'er befal,
The feast, the song, the revel here abounds;
Tho', when some kind, connubial dear,
Waiting for silver-footed messages.
(For knightly Spenser to Libertas told it,)
And Evan's--Donald's  fame rings in each clansman's ears!
Our bardie's fate is at a close,
Sweet poesy by moonlight: besides these,
More lovely far her beauty blows.
Of solitude surrounded every side.
Real are the dreams of Gods, and smoothly pass
The hills of the Highlands for ever I love.
Where Tay rins wimplin' by sae clear;
One moment in reflection: for he fled
It seem'd he had lov'd them a whole summer long:
What is't that ails young Harry Gill?
What heart o' stane wad thou na move,
Of the Hundred Tales of Love--where did they lay
Wi' social nose whyles snuff'd and snowkit,
That best deserves to fa' that?
Nae hand-cuff'd, mizl'd, hap-shackl'd Regent,
How aft her fate's the same, jo.
Her teeth are like a flock of sheep,
Tis agen the running brook, bonny lassie O!
Than sic a moment's pleasure, O!
Sure great folk's life's a life o' pleasure?
"By the gods of the ancients!" Glenriddel replies,
And fitful whims of sleep are made of, streams
They tempt the taste and charm the sight;
Grim Horror grinn'd--pale Terror roar'd,
The glory of evening was spread through the west;
But when I stood beneath the fresh green tree,
Backward, abash'd to ask thy friendly aid?
Sobbed like a child--it almost broke his heart:
Her hair is like the curling mist
That like a deathful meteor gleam'd afar,
Unless your shelter ward th' impending storm.
A bard was selected to witness the fray,
It's no in books, it's no in lear,
But the tinker he swore he could beat them all three,
As e'er in tug or tow was trac'd.
And there I had three score o' yowes,
Into some wond'rous region he had gone,
The downcast eye, repentant of the pain
The night-wind now, with sooty wings,
And downward, how weaken'd, how darken'd, how pain'd!
Apart he stalked in joyless reverie,
Though yet their tongues were still.
One Douglas lives in Home's immortal page,
For I was as it were a Child of thee,
upon a time, Sir Abece the great,
How slow ye move, ye heavy hours,
Is grown right eerie now she's done it,
Rouse from his sluggish slumbers, fell Repentance;
I've travell'd round all Christian ground
But that 'tis ever startled by the leap
Thou stock-dove, whose echo resounds thro' the glen;
Thee, Matthew, Nature's sel' shall mourn
Wan as primroses gather'd at midnight
Red, black-spotted clock-a-clay.
On all sides doubts and terrors met her;
That basket-bearing children running there
The fir trees taper into twigs and wear
To claw common sense for her sins;
The Foe retires--she heads the sallying host:
Upon an ashen stoven pillowing me;
Fintray, my stay in worldly strife,
Than to sing out and sooth their wavy hair.
When glow-worm found in lanes remote
Laws to my footsteps, colour to my cheek,
One sigh doth echo, one poor sob doth pine,
Ravish'd, she lifted her Circean head,
His thoughts to others, though his soul was quelled
'Tis seldom her favourite passion.
And we'll take a right guid willie-waught,
The steeples and the houses and broad untrodden plains.
Fate, do with me what you may--
The darkness,--loneliness,--the fearful thunder;
The woodman threw his faggot from the way
He kneels at morn and noon and eve--
Give me, and I've no more to say,
But what he said it was nae play,--
By rays which sleep there lovingly: the rocks,
And ilka wife cries--"Auld Mahoun,
But what thy own foot makes betray thy home,
A loss these evil days can ne'er repair!
Even into thine own soft-conched ear:
Her een sae bright, like stars by night,
His beading joints and drooping head
That fill'd the eyes of morn;--the laurel'd peers
Ye cliffs, the haunts of sailing yearns,
A wonder, fair as any I have told--
Its airy swellings, with a gentle wave,
Rash judgments, nor the sneers of selfish men,
Who in Oppression's darkness caved had dwelt,
Her palaces are crumbling to the shore,
In midst of all this heaven? Why not see,
Old Apollonius--from him keep me hid."
While all around the woodland rings,
Is untremendous might. Yet ye are here,
Than Hermes' pipe, when anxious he did lean
Would all be lost, unheard, and vain as swords
He aft has wrought me meikle wae;
I thought that I saw him, a ghost by moonlight,
Still sat, still snuff'd the incense, teeming up
Turning to poison while the bee-mouth sips:
They turn to places known so long
Did ye not hear it?--No--'twas but the Wind,
While o'er us unheeded flee the swift hours o' love.
And leaned oer many a rural stile,
The flinty heart that canna feel--
Glar'd a blood-red through all its thousand courts,
An' thinks it auld wives' fables:
Watch her half-smiling lips, and downward look;
Of a' the trades that I do ken,
Disease, death, bondage--all the woes we see,
Sickens our fearful ewes; and we have had
Love watching Madness with unalterable mien.
His love was Passion's essence--as a tree
Thy beauty grows upon me, and I feel
As built on the base of the great Revolution;
And all along a dismal rack of clouds,
--And thou hast heard the thorn's in flower,
Twas now no secret of her being beguiled,
Should auld acquaintance be forgot,
Ye're but a pack o' traitor louns,
While burns, wi' snawy wreeths up-choked,
On her breast, so like to cream,
The eye with wonder and amazement fills;
Not all your rage, as now united, shows
Whole days and days in sheer astonishment;
Not in the phrensy of a dreamer's eye,
By toil and famine wore to skin and bone,
Wi' less, I'm sure, I've hundreds slain;
Shades of the Helots! triumph o'er your foe!
An' hunt him down, o'er right, an' ruth,
May I behold in thee what I was once,
Which eagles cleave upmounting from their nest.
And thy limbs black with lightning--dost thou yet
Open thine eyes, for meek St. Agnes' sake,
While Porphyro upon her face doth look,
But left her memory in each place;
Then on the tither hand present her,
At present we will ask no more,
Crown me with ivy from his dwelling-place.
This weed an ancient neighbour here,
This seraph-band, each wav'd his hand,
And now she's at the pony's head,
But the peace it reduc'd me to beg in despair,
Her auld Scotch heart was true.
None hugged a Conqueror's chain, save fallen Chivalry!
Came not by common growth. Thus on I thought,
Upon the spiritless mist have they outspread
Silence, but not submission: in his lair
From a tree's summit; a poor Indian's sleep
The Bench sae wise lift up their eyes,
The pains and plagues that on our heads came down,
And will none do the last kind deeds
When but some false Mirage of ruin rises near.
From earth to man, from man to earth,
Swift as a fathoming plummet down he fell
Forsaken and friendless, my burden I bear,
And deemed its spring perpetual--but in vain!
Mark them unmoved, for he would not delight
And oer her half-formed nest, with happy wings,
They've nae sair wark to craze their banes,
Though thick'ning and black'ning,
Might turn their steps towards the sober ring
Nor bid me sigh for mine own cost,
And ye'll hae a calf's-head o' sma' value,
While in distant climes I wander,
How often has my spirit turned to thee!
Abandonment of reason  to resign
Will mingle the Maxwells in droves;
Was she a matron of Cornelia's mien,
The neighbours tell, and tell you truly,
Here Stuarts once in glory reign'd,
Seated upon an uptorn forest root;
And death's deaf voice awake at every sound:
And lang has had my heart in thrall;
She stood: he pass'd, shut up in mysteries,
And injur'd Worth forget and pardon man.
No leaves it has, no thorny points;
Whose breath in power did like to thunder sear,
But, at that very touch, to disappear
Nor Worth nor Beauty dwells from out the mind's
Too long and darkly, till my brain became,
Nor saves e'en the wreck of a name;
Man, Earth's poor shadow! talks of Earth's decay:
So, row't his hurdies in a hammock,
Until their grieved bodies 'gan to bloat
With every kindliest, best presage
No sight can bear the lightning of his bow;
Abandon Ocean's children; in the fall
And drives her cows to milk beneath the shade,
Ye but smelt, man, the place where he ----.
With fruits and fertile promise, and the Spring
O let me once more hear the linnet's note!
Whisper'd of peace, and truth, and friendliness unquell'd.
A vulture from his towery perching; frown
The horse will set his foot and bite
She stood in tears amid the alien corn;
His piercing words, like Highlan' swords,
Of all Olympus' faded hierarchy!
To leave the bonnie banks of Ayr.
Then Winter's time-bleach'd looks did hoary show,
Lorenzo stood, and wept: the forest tomb
The stubborn heart, its alchemy begun,
May sprout like simmer puddock stools
He does na fail his part in either.
And then, instead of love, O misery!
Little knew she that seeming marble heart,
Till kicked and torn and beaten out he lies
"That's just a swatch o' Hornbook's way;
Until the poppied warmth of sleep oppress'd
Or if he was grown oughtlins douser,
And as he thus over his passion hung,
What means this bustle, Betty Foy?
From the God's large eyes; he smil'd delectable,
But when he approach'd where poor Francis lay moaning,
Sit thee there, and send abroad,
And like a rose in vermeil tint and shape,
What comfort Johnny soon will bring,
That Spring was just now flirting by
They're left the whitening stanes amang,
Till his time has come to sleep;
"Why such a golden eve? The breeze is sent
Rain'd violets upon his sleeping eyes.
Lord, pity me, for I am little,
Wearying heaven in warm devotion,
What Johnny and his horse are doing!
Pride might forbid e'en Friendship to complain:
And as he touch'd his trembling harp,
For 'twas the auld moon turned a neuk,
She lay there all the summer long.
Elbows down rocks and, shouldering, thunders through.
And little fishes' caller rest:
Her throat was serpent, but the words she spake
For foreign arms and aid they fondly sigh,
Pull droopingly, in slanting curve aside,
While timid hares were darting out,
Stirring the soul to vain imaginings,
But when I see thee meek, and kind, and tender,
With musing-deep, astonish'd stare,
Its mantle o'er the mountains; parting Day
"Forbye some new, uncommon weapons,
Could I, at once, my mad ambition smother,
Then crack went his breeks from the hip to the knee
And in the proof much comfort will I give,
But a' the pride o' spring's return
Nor suffer thy pale forehead to be kiss'd
Can I forget that miserable hour,
When red pied cow again their coming hears,
In sloven garb appears each bawling boy,
Niest day their life is past enduring.
Yon rosebuds in the morning dew
Like an own babe I nurse thee on my breast:
No guess could tell what instrument appear'd,
Come wealth, come poortith, late or soon,
Because he mused beyond her, knowing well
Though old Ulysses tortured from his slumbers
Then sowther a' in deep debauches;
Which galled for ever, fettering though unseen,
"Should the poor be flattered?"
Where the grouse lead their coveys thro' the heather to feed,
Then let his length the loitering pilgrim lay,
So reaching back to boy-hood: make me ships
To bring thee nearer to that golden song
Her half laced boots fit tightly as she tripped along the grass,
The sweetest feeling of the heart--
The mind with in its most unearthly mood,
I stood tip-toe upon a little hill,
Stood stamping his feet, by the flies bitten sore,
What does he murmur with his latest breath,
And holds her shawl, and often looks behind.
(Hey, and the rue grows bonnie wi' thyme),
"How long must I remain in jeopardy
Careless, and grand--fingers soft and round
But Douglases were heroes every age:
Like a sweet nun in holy-day attire?
Tell but one wonder of thy bridal night!
And brought in faintness solemn, sweet, and slow
That sweetest of all songs, that ever new,
Pass not unblest the Genius of the place!
And feeds on sad misfortune's bitterest tears?
In the tomb of Siloa--the tear in her eye
And wild scatter'd cowslips bedeck the green dale:
At thy bathed base the bloody Cæsar lie,
Into some backward corner of the brain;
And see thee toddle oer the plain,
By stately tow'r, or palace fair,
Her youth to Heaven; her heart, beneath a claim
But leaves in silence when the nest is found.
Where willows, oer the bank inclined
Clear streams, smooth lakes, and overlooking towers.
It would thy brain unsettle even to hear.
And stirr'd them faintly. Verdant cave and cell
Calling the storms to bear him o'er a guilty land?"
They drink the sweet and eat the fat,
I stood in Venice, on the "Bridge of Sighs;"
In all thy perfect Goddess-ship, when lies
Imperial mimic of old Egypt's piles,
Fu' is his burn, fu' is his byre;
In Autumn's sickle, Winter frosty hoar,
While his boat hastens to the monstrous steep
Together hymning their Creator's praise,
Thou hear'st the winter wind and weet!
His rosary, and while his frosted breath,
Of victories but a comma. Fame could find
"L--d, five!" he cry'd, an' owre did stagger;
Though here no more Apollo haunts his Grot,
As 'twere its natural torches--for divine
Or by the moon lifting her silver rim
St. Agnes' Eve--Ah, bitter chill it was!
Where early Love his Psyche's zone unbound,
I sing of a whistle, the pride of the North,
Under friendship's kind disguise!
To paint with Thomson's landscape glow;
The husband frae the wife despises!
The frightened horse, with broken rein,
Who love the lords of others? such have been
He lengthens out his lonely shout,
An' yet he's rank'd amang the chief
Officiously. Sideway his face repos'd
Had come young Porphyro, with heart on fire
Albion! to thee:  the Ocean queen should not
Lord help me thro' this warld o' care!
Whose tones reach nought on earth but Poet's ear.
While thick the gossamer waves wanton in the rays.
O thou! whatever title suit thee,
I'd rip their rotten, hollow hearts,
In muffling hands. So temper'd, out he stray'd
With well-timed croupe  the nimble coursers veer;
With head oft dabbing in the flood
The partridge loves the fruitful fells;
gold and silver beads, and the further we go the brighter they seem to
An' lows'd his ill tongu'd, wicked scawl,
Which she to Susan will not tell.
Our second Right--but needless here is caution,
On an old ribbed and weather beaten horse,
Still round him clung invisibly a chain
And scatter'd in his face some fragments light.
A-chasing the wild deer, and following the roe--
And up the ladder softly tread;
And fish with crooked pins and thread and never catch a thing,
Time and chance are but a tide,
Where thou alone shalt come to me, and lave
And ken the lingo of the sp'ritual folk;
Around the western border of the wood,
Leaving but ruins, wherewith to rebuild
But, peering down each precipice, the goat
Meantime some rude Arion's restless hand
And singing, lone, the ling'ring hours,
And air, and pains, and care, and suffering;
But the fair paradise of Nature's light?
No common soul. In youth, by genius nurs'd,
Winter is almost summer where they grow.
Like some wood-fiend that frights benighted men,
Is, in this restless world, for me reserv'd.
As lang's my tail, whare, through the steeks,
On such as smile upon us; the heart must
Shall thus be _first_ beheld, forgotten _last_:
L--d, man, our gentry care as little
Their sports were cheap an' cheery;
An' pease an' beans, at e'en or morn,
On Johnny vile reflections cast;
In perilous bustle; while upon the deck
He star'd at the Pacific--and all his men
Flows there a tear of Pity for the dead?
And whisper'd thus his tale o' love:
The one they railed at could not contradict.
The last, the worst, dull spoiler, who was he?
And as the stately vessel glided slow
For quenchless burnings come upon the heart,
When I've nothing my leisure to hinder
Search my most hidden breast! By truth's own tongue,
An' thy poor worthless daddy's spirit,
But what was said, or what was done,
Far off, the shadows of his pinions dark,
Ocean's blue mantle streak'd with purple, and green.
No man can tell; but all before their sight,
For time beheld thee as her sacred dower
The amorous promise of her lone complain,
Here, that I too may live: but if beyond
Or dost thou dread a French foeman?
Or him wha led o'er Scotland a'
Nor am I even the thing I cou'd be,
Now prouder still, Maria's temples press.
Then trace thy footsteps on with me:
Blood--pulse--and breast confirm the Dardan Shepherd's prize.
To cloud-borne Jove he bowed, and there crost
The Moon is up, and yet it is not night--
O gude ale comes, and gude ale goes,
And there, while big drops bow the grassy stems,
And o'er my eyes the trembling moisture shake.
The wilfu' creature sae I pat to,
That often must have seen a poet frantic;
Aft bure the gree, as story tells,
Again the silent wheels of time
By overshadowed ponds, in woody nooks,
How every soldier, with firm foot, doth hold
Come weel, come woe, I care na by,
Some high-capped Tartar spurred his steed away:
'Gainst fortune's fell cruel decree?--Jessy!
Nor is it discontent to keep the mind
Like meeting her, our bosom's treasure?
And many a Dob's heard clattering oer the green.
Or a white Naiad in a rippling stream;
The simple plaining of a minstrel's song!
Of him whose name to ev'ry heart's a solace,
The brightest jewel in my crown
Macpherson's time will not be long
And when the Almighty lifts his fiercest scourge
Could hear your footsteps touch the grav'ly floor.
Pick up the insects from your grounds,
Though bitter sneers and stinging scorns
Since Zion's desolation, when that He
Such witching books are baited hooks
And press it so upon our weary griefs
Our flatt'ry we'll keep for some other,
But what dy'e think, my trusty fier,
Endymion sought around, and shook each bed
At speaking out what I have dared to think.
And my own shadow all my company;
Diffus'd unseen throughout eternal space:
Like phantoms, to the iron porch, they glide;
Where weeds shall crown alike the head
Thou comes--they rattle i' their ranks
Of Freedom's withered trunk puts forth a leaf,
Strains his shrill pipe as good or ill betides,
And Pleasure, leagued with Pomp, the zest of both destroys.
Or with the moonbeam sleep in Midnight's solemn trance.
Collects his spades, his mattocks, and his hoes,
Dante, and Petrarch, and, scarce less than they,
No, doubly no;--yet should these rhymings please,
But Homer-like, the glowran byke,
All that has caused this wreck in my bosom,
For his great Maker's presence, but must know
Greece is no lightsome land of social mirth:
O what a load of misery and pain
Which stings more keenly through the thin disguise.
E'en in this isle; and who could paragon
I mov'd my lips: the Pilot shriek'd
Thou need na start awa sae hasty,
The passing stranger oft with wonder stops
An' then, if kirk folks dinna clutch me,
Follies past, give thou to air,
How tiptoe Night holds back her dark-grey hood.
And sometimes into cities she would send
Who at each other tilt in playful quarrel,
The tane is game, a bluidie devil,
Some mountain breeze had turned its chief delight,
Strolled to the meadow-lake to play,
Is miserable. 'Twas even so with this
Enough for my rude boat, where should I steer?
Learning to lie with silence, would _seem_ true--
Thou'll break my heart, thou bonnie bird,
Here, ambush'd by the chimla cheek,
And some had sworn an oath that she
"Great nature spoke, observant man obey'd."
The children sought thee in thy summer shade
Of blank amazements that amaze no more?
Could he have kept his spirit to that flight
Be of ripe progress--Saturn must be King.
O vulture-witch, hast never heard of mercy?
Thou found'st me, like the morning sun,
And counted was baith wight and stark.
Yet haply not incapable of joy,
And rolls through all things. Therefore am I still
Bounds through the crowd of merry leaves
The ready measure rins as fine,
Mere jesting in an earnest way,
And seem'd to my astonish'd view,
Yarrow an' Tweed, to monie a tune,
Till, so unwilling, thou unturn'dst the key?
Crush the locusts--save the flower.
Shall bloom that wreath thou well hast won;
Then, man my soul with firm resolves
When they gae to the shore o' Bucky,
Unhappy Arethusa! thou wast late
Upon a knowe they sat them down,
It is not that I may not have incurred,
Autumn's red-lipp'd fruitage too,
If in your bounds ye chance to light
Yon sinkin sun's gane down upon;
Whose matter in bright gold were best be read;
Scanty the hamlet, rare the lonely cot:
Kyle-Stewart I could bragged wide,
Yet further off, are dimly seen their bowers,
Here Douglas forms wild Shakspeare into plan,
Pausing upon their yellow flutterings.
And learn a lesson from thy destiny;
Flying from something that he dreads, than one
The grunting pigs, that wait for all,
Commences with a dim and mackerel sky.
Who found for me the grandeur of the ode,
When shall I see the white-thorn leaves agen,
How guess'd ye, Sir, what maist I wanted?
Weaving a coronal of tender scions
Until 'twas too fierce agony to bear;
And over it a sighing voice expire.
There the hot shaft should blast whatever therein lurked.
Of thy cave-guarded Spring, with years unwrinkled,
Where is thy place of blissful rest?
By quiet woods and gravel springs,
Forgive the Bard! my fond regard
The neist cam in a sodger youth,
An' rot the dyvors i' the jails!
The Genius of the stream in front appears,
A fairer than either adorns the green valleys,
The doctor's self would hardly spare,
That I might all forget the human race,
That guide the squandered covey home.
Delicious sounds! those little bright-eyed things
It was Hyperion:--a granite peak
The message certain to be done to-morrow.
For there he rov'd that brake my heart,
Syne draws her kebbuck an' her knife;
Hot, glaz'd, and wide, with lid-lashes all sear,
Because her face was turn'd to the same skies;
Waiting for some destruction--when lo,
I'd better gaen an' sair't the king,
That from the tiny bents and misted leaves
And "God is with us" waves reply.
And hark! the Nightingale begins its song,
I'll often greet this surging swell,
Yet deem not these Devotion's offering--
I fled, it follow'd me, and cried 'Apollo!'
Sweet Hope, ethereal balm upon me shed.
The shouts o' war are heard afar,
Into the fearful deep, to hide his head
I had watched her night and day, be sure, and never slept agen,
Begirt with ministring looks: alway his eye
And haply the Queen-Moon is on her throne,
She saw the young Corinthian Lycius
Though like as was ever twin brother to brother,
But when the Sun was sinking in the sea
Who sin and tell us love can die.
A casement high and triple-arch'd there was,
Up in the winds, beneath a starry roof,
And it shall comfort me within the tomb.
Perhaps to see shapes of light, aerial lymning,
While still I held him by the arm,
"What, woman! should I know of him?"
Love's veriest wretch, unseen, unknown,
Have spoken? that from hastening disgrace
"But wherefore to the mountain-top
The light dwelt o'er the scene so lingeringly.
On one, and felt himself in spleen to tame
And showed not Fortune thus how fame and sway,
But such is the flaw, or the depth of the plan,
The godlike bliss, to give, alone excels.
With Nature's baptism,--'tis to him ye must
An' muckle din there was about it,
Bobs hasty out--wheels round and, scared as soon,
And with thee fade away into the forest dim:
And tir'd o' sauls to waste his lear on
The laughing dames in whom he did delight,
The lads and lasses met him there,
Is growing fresh before me as the green
Those days, all innocent of scathing war,
All in its mid-day gold and glimmering.
Veneering oft outshines the solid wood:
Mysel', I've even seen them greetin'
Grasshoppers go in many a thumming spring
She's spotless like the flow'ring thorn,
Now brightly bold or beautifully shy,
Nature's volcanic Amphitheatre,
And thou grim pow'r, by life abhorr'd,
Secure from night, and dropping dews, and all,
Ah, no! far happier, nobler was his fate!
'Twas done: and straight with sudden swell and fall
Stole through its verdurous matting of fresh trees.
An immortality, and how espouse
The sma', droop-rumpl't, hunter cattle,
So I must toil, and sweat and broil,
For had he said, "the soul alone
That brethren rouse to deadly hate!
Syne as ye brew, my maiden fair,
Over his nested young: but all is dark
First, what did yesternight deliver?
Might once again renew their ancient butcher-work.
He mourns that day so soon has glided by:
There the gay river, laughing as it goes,
Mourn, clam'ring craiks, at close o' day,
An' chiefly in her roguish een.
They lifted up their stiff right arms,
Whither didst melt? Ah, what of that!--all good
Thoughts of more deep seclusion; and connect
But weeds of dark luxuriance, tares of haste,
A Spirit which with these would find a home,
Wrongs, injuries, from many a darksome den,
I wish to send my thoughts to her
Till he relent, and can no more endure
Enormous chasms, where, all foam and roar,
Of deep-seen wonders motionless,--and blaze
Too, too late for the fond believing lyre,
Love's sun went down without a frown,
Out o'er yon muir, out o'er yon moss,
There's nane sall ken, there's nane sall guess,
And flowers, the glory of one day, are blowing;
And travelling my eye, until the doors
Thro' weary life this lesson learn--
The Anglian lion, the terror of France,
I said he might die when he liked for Jean,
And lowly-bending to the lists advance;
My sword that's bent in the middle brown;
He fine a mangy sheep could scrub,
Tho' despair had wrung its core,
Then again they all tried, and the tinker he swore
Nor sauce, nor state, that I could see,
They secret to their pillows creep,
An infant's grave was half so fair.
O wha will own he did the fau't?
The maiden sobb'd awhile, and then replied:
Nae could faint-hearted doubtings tease him;
The guerdon of their murder they had got,
Or by the bowery clefts, and leafy shelves,
Those smiling ladies, often turned his head
Rest on--for what? what do we here?
Ours is a trophy which will not decay
Coming into the blue with all her light.
Even as the beasts that perish--save that thou
Bending at the wild wind's breath,
Lest she should vanish ere his lip had paid
Well--I will dream that we may meet again,
Ere yet the bee hath gleaned one wayward drop
Striving their ghastly malady to cheer,
A world is at our feet as fragile as our clay.
Let me ryke up to dight that tear,
Buttoning his doublet closer to his chin,
A sunbeam found a passage there,
"Why you would change sweet Liswyn farm
And put them with her in her winding-sheet.
To Corinth from the shore; for freshly blew
Gay Pleasure ran riot as bumpers ran o'er;
For which they never toil'd nor swat;
Or look with ruffian passion in her face:
Could I but teach the hundredth part
Wi' balmy gale, frae hill and dale
How he could plough thurrows as straight as a line;
In this strange death of life to be,
Still springing o'er thy banks, though Empires near them fall.
His cheek to hers he fondly prest,
She trusts the ruthless falconer,
And half an idiot too, more helpless still;
Then there was pictur'd the regality
Left thee so quiet on this bed of dew?
These uttering lips, while I in calm speech tell
Thy fragile bones to unknown burial.
And of the happiest moments which were wrought
As marble was there lavish, to the vast
Apollo singeth, while his chariot
For the sun's purple couch; to emulate
Some looking on, and urging some to toil,
An' fill it in a silver tassie;
Epirus' bounds recede, and mountains fail;
For muckle anes an' straught anes.
As newly come of heaven, dost thou sit
No, not with such old-fashioned, idle views
The stirring memory of a thousand years,
Swallows check their winding flight,
The frank address and politesse
To hear the moon sae sadly lie'd on
The heartless Parasites of present cheer.
But there are wanderers o'er Eternity
'Twas hid from her: "For cruel 'tis," said she,
A whisp of straw or stubble makes his bed.
Buried in air, the deep blue sky of Rome,
The shepherd sees them and the boy goes bye
Fu' stately strode he on the plain:
At Brooses thou had ne'er a fellow,
Was weak, nor of the past had memory.
"The eye it cannot chuse but see,
Fair as some wonder out of fairy land,
For other wars, where he a hero shines;
Arise; and, as the clouds along them break,
Till future life, future no more,
Keen, fitful gusts are whisp'ring here and there
Day, how few must see the night;
The Patron, (Sir, ye maun forgie me,
Their children's children would in vain adore
Also, when he would taste the spicy wreaths
She was nae get o' moorland tips,
Turn'd o'er in one bumper a bottle of red,
Thee, Spring, again with joy shall others greet,
Yet dry them up, in bidding hence all fears
Or whispering, with white lips--"The foe! They come! they come!"
And did not know it,--no, they went about,
But long before had Freedom's face been veiled,
Burgoyne gaed up, like spur an' whip,
For ever: let our fate stop here--a kid
And, shunning-hermit of the light,
Parting luxuriant curls;--and the swift bound
To fly from, need not be to hate, mankind:
And bait him all the day with many dogs,
Yes, every thing, even to the pearly cup
And now what lands between us lie,
To watch, while for the barn she sets,
Of younger friends; yet must I do this wrong,
From some approaching wonder, and behold
The curly foam with amorous influence.
What tears of bitter grief till then unknown!
Neath the willow's wavy boughs,
O Willie, come sell your fiddle,
With Spain's dark-glancing daughters--deign to know,
How sweet it were in concert to adore
That men forget the blood which she hath spilt,
Too full of joy and soft delicious warmth;
For lapfu's large o' gospel kail
Adieu, valiant Eric! with joy thou art crown'd;
What is title? what is treasure?
Gabbling home, the quarreling geese
Or schoolboy Midshipman that, standing by,
Though young Lorenzo in warm Indian clove
Then living on the earth, with labouring thought
And the book in my pocket was read in an hour.
To think on him that's far awa.
"That we can feed this mind of ours,
Philosophers have fought and wrangled,
A thing all consequence here takes the lead,
"When the Marinere's trance is abated."
Went step for step with Thea through the woods,
And for full fifty yards around,
Two rude cut letters mark the owner's name;
Let her bring from the chamber her many-toned lyre,
And fill her up wi' brimstone drink,
I like the garden, but she loved the wild--
"While stands the Coliseum, Rome shall stand:
Dear brothers of the mystic tie!
A lively prelude, fashioning the way
Where witches meet the yews about:
He saw Misfortune's cauld nor-west
O for that sweet, untroubled rest
Does a' his weary kiaugh and care beguile,
But long ere scarce a third of his passed by,
Would I could guess, I do profess,
Where she oer the stile had gone,
And, from the turf, a lullaby doth pass
To northern seas I'll in a twinkling sail,
By thinking it a thing of yes and no,
To tell; 'tis dizziness to think of it.
To dearer selves, to the lov'd tender fair,
Therefore, great bard, I not so fearfully
Meantime I seek no sympathies, nor need--
Upon a far and foreign soil had grown,
Since then, my honour'd, first of friends,
The Angus lads had nae good-will
She gazes idly!--But that entrance, Mother!
Upon a day, while thus I watch'd, by flew
And oft-times through the area's echoing door
And dreads a meeting worse than Woolwich hulks;
Grasping this scroll, and this same slender wand.
Where, save that feeble fountain, all is still;
While hurried Lamia trembled: "Ah," said he,
I see you are treading the verge of the sea:
For yet, unskaith'd by death's gleg gullie,
I live not in myself, but I become
They took the brig wi' a' their might,
Distinguishes the West, no long thin slip
There hangs by unseen film, an orbed drop
His sheep an' kye thrive bonnie, O;
By telling what he sees from native merit.
Came thy sweet greeting, that if thou shouldst fade
And there, ere many days be overpast,
To fight and catch the great white butterfly.
But 'tis impossible; far different cares
All Heaven and Earth are still--though not in sleep,
Wont to be first unsealing morning's eye,
And barks and snaps and drives them in the holes.
To seek a shelter that may keep him dry;
'Mid many things most new to ear and eye
Through which the poppies show their scarlet coats
Save one whom none regarded, Clymene;
To get the kernel from the shell;
'Twould vamp my bill, said I, if nothing better;
The ploughman would turn from his plough in the day
Or forests rude, and the oershadowed brims
To what green altar, O mysterious priest,
Thou's broken the heart o' thy Willy.
When the bet was to bind him he'd nothing to pay.
Which eats into itself, and rusts ingloriously.
But soon in me shall Loneliness renew
Arose and knelt before him, wept a rain
Kingfishers watch the ripple stream
That smooth the path of honour; brotherhood,
Yet Heaven avert that ever thou
When he upswimmeth from the coral caves.
Where Peggy's charms I first survey'd,
In the retired quiet of the night,
Beneath that hill of moss so fair.
Then feels the heat too strong, and goes aloof;
If I do fall, at least I will be laid
And an immortal instinct which redeemed
"Fair damsel, pity me! forgive that I
I'd rove, and ne'er be eerie, O;
Bushes and trees do lean all round athwart,
But like the sun eclips'd at morning tide,
What do I gaze on? Nothing--Look again!
The spite of hell is tumbling to its grave.
And gane, alas! the shelt'ring tree,
How can ye chant, ye little birds,
Trembling or stedfastness to this same voice,
And shall a glimmering planet fix
Like a fresh sacrifice; or, if I can bear
The youth at once arose: a placid lake
I turn'd my eyes upon the deck--
She through the yard the nearest taks,
And on the very bark 'gainst which he leant
Summer's joys are spoilt by use,
Be incense-pillow'd every summer night.
Says the gipsey, May I never bottom a chair
Or noble Elgin beets the heaven-ward flame,
The sacred vow,--we ne'er should sever.
All stood together on the deck,
About that tight and deadly band
'Twas in that season, when a simple bard,
Far on the solitary shore he sleeps:
An' monie a fallow gat his licks,
Lands that contain the monuments of Eld,
Have made me not a stranger; to the mind
To fly, though pelted by the passing swain;
So honoured--and conspicuously there,
I am to stifle all the heavy sorrow
By one and one, to pale oblivion;
Sweet are thy groves, and verdant are thy fields,
But Time shall tear thy shadow from me last.
The which were blended in, I know not how,
Then tore with bloody talon the rent plain,
My presence in wide Corinth hardly known:
Kept up among the guests, discoursing low
Could I thus sail, and see, and thus await
(Hey, and the rue grows bonnie wi' thyme),
Worse than Adversity the Childe befell;
God bless you a'! consider now,
And I will tell thee stories of the sky,
And cottage after cottage owned its sway,
It is the moss, that wholly hides
Her face so truly, heav'nly fair,
She said, and vanish'd with the sweeping blast.
And Burke shall sing, O Prince, arise,
To bloom on earth, eternal spring;
A bush of May flowers with the bees about them;
Melted to one vast Iris of the West,--
Nor e'er will the music of Oberon die.
Then turn'd, an' laid a smack on Grizzie,
With so much happiness to spare,
Would never make a lay of mine enchanting,
A running stream they darena cross!
Perchance even dearer in her day of woe,
Syren of sullen moods and fading hues,
Home through the gloomy wood in wonderment.
I saw fair freedom's blossoms richly blow:
Just then passed the dandy and turned up his nose:
Sadder and wiser thou wedding-guest!
And from his native land resolved to go,
Since the fierce Carthaginian almost won thee,
Escapes, his fondness to declare;
Her bundle from her lap let fall;
With holy men, nor in a holy place--
All the sad spaces of oblivion,
Against all elements, against the tie
He is the last of all my flock.
And points to ruin and disgrace,
With hollow shapes and silken leaves,
E'en then, a wish, I mind its pow'r,
Denotes how soft that chin which bears his touch:
An' gar him follow to the kirk--
And ay she wist na what to say;
Until it seems prolonging without end.
An' how ye gat him i' your thrall,
Down whose green back the short-liv'd foam, all hoar,
Not Pulteney's wealth can Pulteney save!
He kept the fragments while a bit was left.
Her face it bloomed like a sweet flower
Thou flattering work of friendship kind,
"And none had lived before you!"
And Susan's growing worse and worse,
The stars look very cold about the sky,
And here, where buzzing nations choked the ways,
And kill a care, to friendship turned in rhyme.
Her way may lie thro' rough distress!
A thousand years with backward glance sublime?
What Aiken in a cottage would have been;
The tyrants that do act the God in clay
Whence it ran brightly forth, and white did lave
The white hawthorn and grey oak tree,
The lightnings flash from pole to pole;
Where words ne'er crost the muse's heckles,
The braes ascend, like lofty wa's,
Is all the noise the spring encounters now.
Conquest and Fame: but Britons rarely swerve
But haply, in some cottage far apart,
Of nymphs approaching fairly o'er the sward:
And thro' my lugs gies mony a twang,
"O Thou wha gies us each guid gift!
morning on the budding leaves; nay, the road grasses are covered with
The weariness, the fever, and the fret
When hers would always prick the worst of luck;
That's half so fair as thou art.
It was her best, and she was vauntie--
They dragged poor Jenny's lifeless body out,
In his own kind and kindred, whom to teach
The crystal spout-head: so it did, with touch
I wha sae late did range and rove,
He cheeps like some bewilder'd chicken,
Nightly dreams, and thoughts by day,
My brave gallant friends! 'tis your ruin I mourn;
"And where are they, I pray you tell?"
Stealing glad thoughts from grief,
Should shield thee frae the storm.
Though to leave your pretty song,
Wi' his fause heart and flatt'ring tongue.
No more amidst the meaner dead find room,
Seeing thou art so gentle. Could I weed
An' lastly, Jamie, for yoursel',
When they fa' foul o' earthly jinkers,
Then farewell hopes o' laurel-boughs,
So let's go and wet all our whistles with that.
But there is that within me which shall tire
Futurity to her! and, though it must
Lang Patronage, wi' rod o' airn,
Dry up the moisture from your golden lids,
And she is known to every star,
That we must ever wonder how, and whence
'Twould humour many a heart to leave them thus,
So may ye get in glad possession,
Poor is the task to please a barbarous throng,
And saw each bed-post with its burden a-groaning,
Lies senseless of each tugging bitch's son.
O thou dread Power, who reign'st above!
Some moulder'd steps lead into this cool cell,
Till it begins to progress silverly
And meadow pools, torn wide by lawless floods,
Its poison in the eyes of conquering Jove.
Her haffet locks as brown's a berry;
In public praises' hue and cry;
I miss the heath, its yellow furze,
But an ye be crafty, I am cunnin',
As Murther at his thrapple shor'd,
As thou exceedest all things in thy shine,
He leans away for highest heaven and sings,
Thou wilt be gone away, and wilt not heed
Kept undulation round his eager neck.
Italia! oh, Italia! thou who hast
But whilst your wishes and endeavours
I feel myself exalted--Can ye not
I lippen'd to the chief in trouth,
_His_ bones were black with many a crack,
And after viewed them, when, within their power,
I came to a dark valley.--Groanings swell'd
His acres till'd, he's right eneugh;
"What can I do, Alpheus? Dian stands
Now let us lay our heads thegither,
O speak your counsel now, for Saturn's ear
Gladdening in the free, and airy feel
Expect na, Sir, in this narration,
The hawthorn's budding in the glen,
The scenes where wretched fancy roves,
But ah! how hope is born but to expire!
And that curs'd rascal call'd M'Quhae,
Above, the frequent feudal towers
And wound with many a river to its head,
Which fell profusely from the rose-tree stem!
Wild to my heart the filial pulses glow,
When with an elder sister's air
My sword that's bent in the middle clear;
They an' be d----d! what right hae they
And seldom felt she any hunger-pain;
But every one his master leaves the worst.
Mark the clear tumbling crystal, its passionate gushes,
And then the prize was all for Isabel:
To early-risers many a Hodge is seen,
Mixed with thy spirit, blended with thy birth,
Yes, she, whose generous aid her name endears,
And dreaded gadflies with their drowsy hum
What Heaven hath done for this delicious land!
He founder'd his horse among harlots,
One felt heart-certain that he could not miss
Dame Fortune should hing by the neck;
In which a trembling diamond never lingers.
And (what would now be strange) ye godly writers;
And silken snoods he gae me twa;
The Sun, the soil--but not the slave, the same;--
A little moment past, so smiling!
Because I lov'd her?--Cold, O cold indeed
Calm or convulsed--in breeze, or gale, or storm--
Follow me, child, or else these stones will be thy bier."
Might aiblins waur't thee for a brattle;
By Hospitality with cloudless brow.
Of fruitage and so scatters them abroad
It's a' for the apple he'll nourish the tree;
Himself along the grass. What gentle tongue,
Of out-spread wings, and from between them shone
She hastens out and scarcely pins her clothes
Whose mightiness, and awe of him, at once
And each as suits his ends transacts his part.
Blithe, blithe and merry was she,
But the lark high above charmed me all the day long,
Of guilt, perhaps, where we've involved others;
Love is the honey, not the bee,
While keeping in the meadows holiday.
Oh, thou, whose chariot rolled on Fortune's wheel,
Gave from their hollow throats the name of "Saturn!"
We'll mourn till we too go as he has gone,
Such be the sons of Spain, and strange her Fate!
Or winter howls, in gusty storms,
Ye stately foxgloves fair to see;
Might see how poor a hut she had.
Should auld acquaintance be forgot,
Dark chill November draweth to a close.
"Oh saints! what is become of him?
Guess ye how, the jad! I could bear her, could bear her,
Which have relapsed to chaos:--here repose
Where the grouse lead their coveys thro' the heather to feed,
Green leaves have all turned yellow;
One morning, by the break of day,
Nibble their fill at ocean's very marge,
"Many and sharp the num'rous ills
Almost the highest bliss of human-kind,
An' though the gentry first are stechin,
As oft mong folks to labour bustling on,
Our friend of youth, that Ocean, which when we
For monie a plack they wheedle frae me,
Affliction's sons are brothers in distress,
The Midnight brought the signal-sound of strife,
With the Rialto;  Shylock and the Moor,
Such ranges of white feet, and patient lips
Let him be planted in my place,
Even in the olden time, Rome's annals say.
Auld Hornie, Satan, Kick, or Clootie,
And long accustomed bondage uncreate?
But lest you think I am uncivil,
Awa wi' your belles and your beauties,
A small unnoticed trifling thing
An' worry'd ither in diversion;
Some rascal's pridefu' greed to quench,
The breaking of ae point, though sma',
But gie him't het, my hearty cocks!
Bronze clarions awake, and faintly bruit,
Of human neighbourhood envenom all.
At first, for scarcely was the wine at flow;
With ramping sallows lined, and crowding sedge,
A half-forgetfulness in mountain wind
How sickening, how dark the dreadful leisure
Like pious incense from a censer old,
I'll pledge my aith in guid braid Scotch,
Abrupt in middle air? Yet earthward bend
Rising in lofty ranks, and loftier still,
"Here will I die; here will I die;
Which are his shade on high, and the loud roar
Drunken or sober, here's to thee, Katie!
To lure--Endymion, dear brother, say
Sweet was the scene, yet soon he thought to flee,
To desperation? Is there nought for me,
For Summer would be ever green, though sloes were in their prime,
And straightway into frightful eddies swoop'd;
Phoebus gilding the brow o' morning,
Far as the eye discerns, withouten end,
She's left the guid-fellow and ta'en the churl.
But Orpheus-like at an Eurydice;
Her basket falls and out her cowslips all
Her comely face sae fu' o' grace,
Nor quit for me the trembling spray;
And simple folk maun fight and fen;
Where by the winding Ayr we met,
None that, with kindred consciousness endued,
To feel distemper'd longings: to desire
Who have left streaks of light athwart their ages:
Of clattering hoofs; into the court he sprang,
And some to maken up a cuckaball
E'en now I'm pillow'd on a bed of flowers
In hope to merit Heaven by making earth a Hell.
(Hey, and the rue grows bonnie wi' thyme),
To see ye thus,--not very, very sad?
Learn'd vive la bagatelle, et vive l'amour:
To hear each voice we feared to hear no more!
Opinionates with wisdom all compact,
And my fause luver stole my rose,
Bill and mittens, lie ye there!
As man was slaughtered by his fellow man.
Alone preserved me from the drear abyss
He reels on warily along the street,
I cannot think, whate'er they say,
Her brethren, noted the continual shower
Wilt thou wi' me tent the flocks?
The broken iron instruments of death;
So dinna ye affront your trade,
They footed owre the wat'ry glass so neat,
Your course to the latest is bright.
So at Hyperion's words the Phantoms pale
Even as Hope upon her anchor leans,
Fareweel even to the Scottish name,
And savage faces, at the clanking hour,
Is it not better, then, to be alone,
In cart or car thou never reestit;
What can I? Tell me, all ye brethren Gods,
As does the nightingale, upperched high,
Some pleasant words:--but Love will have his day.
While here I stand, not only with the sense
Parents and children and grandchildren all
When Winter lifts his voice; there is a noise
Have I not seen what human things could do?
Is there that o'er his French ragout,
"Our home by Kilve's delightful shore,
And all had joined in one endeavour
And turns agen, from danger never free.
Rous'd by his whispering footsteps murmured faint:
Whyles cookit underneath the braes,
In strife to throw upon the shore a gem
Him in a closet, of such privacy
Wi' purple blossoms to the spring;
Pass we the calm--the gale--the change--the tack,
But o'er the blacken'd memory's blighting dream
Old ditties sigh above their father's grave;
You need not use no force at all,
The soft, lute-finger'd Muses chaunting clear,
Timid and smiling, beautiful and shy,
Be thou deck'd in silken stole,
The thorny sharks from hiding-holes, and fright'ning
Lorenzo, if thy lips breathe not love's tune."--
I'm tauld they're loosome kimmers!
His soul was like the glorious sun,
Without a motion, save of their big hearts
And all its dizzy raptures. Not for this
She trembles at thee still, and thy wild name
And slight withal may be the things which bring
Wi' merry dance in winter days,
A hymn from Dian's temple; while upswelling,
And Westerha' and Hopeton hurl'd
And the long carpets rose along the gusty floor.
To woo sweet kisses from averted faces,--
A soft and silken mat for Saturn's feet.
Then let the Winds howl on! their harmony
But the lassie that a man lo'es best,
The swiftest thought of Beauty, here extend
Her lover sinks--she sheds no ill-timed tear;
Now they have ta'en away her Basil sweet.
Who hath beheld decline upon my brow,
And sleep as I in childhood sweetly slept:
Tones ravishment, or ravishment its sweet,
Weel kend his voice thro' a' the wood,
For one whose cheek is pale: thou dost bewail
What tho' at times when I grow crouse,
Yet poesy breathes his shepherd-skill,
O' manhood but sma' is your share;
The ball-piled pyramid, the ever-blazing match,
Still fed by melting ice, he takes a draught--
By chilly finger'd spring. "Unhappy wight!
While yet he spake they had arrived before
Then up sprang Bess of Annandale,
Stifle thine heart no more:--nor be afraid
She kneads the lumpish philosophic dough,
A fleechin', fleth'rin dedication,
Before mine eyes thick films and shadows float--
Known unto all,--or hope and dread allayed
Suffice it, that perchance they were of fame,
Thou maks the gossips clatter bright,
Or maiden's sigh, that grief itself embalms:
The moon was setting on the hill,
O happy love! Where love like this is found!
And double marygolds, and silver thyme,
And for a beau I might have pass'd
Who dar'd to nobly stem tyrannic pride,
Quoth I, for shame, ye dirty dame,
But Betty's bent on her intent,
A weel-stocked mailen--himsel' for the laird--
With wings or chariot fierce to repossess
Nor is it harsh to make, nor hard to find
For which we daurna show our face
All the heaped Autumn's wealth,
Lie a' that would my sorrows share.
So long as Sir John rolled along to the door,
But yet I guess that now and then
To whose cool bosom she was used to bring
"Ye ken Jock Hornbook i' the Clachan,
That, when I think thereon, my spirit clings
Her image floating on that noble tide,
Soon were the white doves plain, with necks stretch'd out,
And finds a hovel at the close of day,
Twa had manteeles o' dolefu' black,
A garden with its hawthorn hedge was all
Smiling upon the flowers and the trees:
Loud was the lightsome tumult on the shore,
I planted,--they have torn me,--and I bleed:
The stationed bands, the never-vacant watch,
Charms us at once away from all our troubles:
A warmer heart death ne'er made cold.
A glowing splendour round about me hung,
These were the elements,--and thine no less.
Charm or instruct the future age,
And Policy regained what arms had lost:
Hughie Graham this day shall die.
An old smoaked blanket arches oer his head,
And in her bearing was a sort of hope,
And cloister'd among cool and bunched leaves--
There was a place untenanted in it:
Care, mad to see a man sae happy,
The red-coat lads, wi' black cockades,
I pass'd the mill, and trysting thorn,
But Passion raves herself  to rest, or flies;
And clear and open soul, so prized in fearless youth.
And maybe, Tam, for a' my cants,
But distress with horrors arming,
Spun round in sable curtaining of clouds;
Since shamed full oft by later lyres on earth,
O had I ne'er seen thee, my Phely!
And then, O what a glorious sight,
For skies Italian, and an inward groan
Never slumber'd, never cloying.
To seek the shipwreck and to share the spoil.
And yearly keep with nettles smothering oer;--
The keystones of the Arch! though all were o'er,
To regions of his own his genius true
At the mere touch of cold philosophy?
But these did shelter him beneath their roof,
I looked on the eyes of fair woman too long,
And like a sheep head on a tangs,
Wolf's-bane, tight-rooted, for its poisonous wine;
"Beauty is truth, truth beauty,"--that is all
And woodbine-flowers at every bush she met.
Scarce images of life, one here, one there,
Charlie Gregor tint his plaidie,
Then turn me, if Thou please, adrift,
First twas a hum, but now it loudly squalls;
Through the dark earth, and through the wondrous sea?
Thro' wind and weet, thro' frost and snaw;
Princes, whose cumb'rous pride was all their worth,
And welcome Lapland's dreary sky!
We're frail backsliding mortals merely,
Her lips are roses wat wi' dew,
And send him safe hame to his babie and me!
And the next day will be a day of sorrow.
The sand, nor blindly rushes on his foe:
And damn a' parties but your own;
In the field of proud honour--our swords in our hands,
Ye yet may follow where a Douglas leads!
Ye wise ones, hence! ye hurt the social eye!
Now wae to thee, thou cruel lord,
As ye make mony a fond heart mourn,
With chill hoary wing, as ye usher the dawn;
She'll aiblins listen to my vow:
Fast fading violets cover'd up in leaves;
The blight of Life--the Demon Thought.
Blush at the curious stranger peeping in;
That bawled for shelter when he lived in showers
Half-jest, she tried one curious labour more.
Since then at an uncertain hour,
From hedge to hedge about the new-mown mead;
Handfuls of daisies."--"Endymion, how strange!
Of what enjoyments thou hast reft us!
With a proud caution, love, or hate, or aught,--
The night comes to me, but my rest it is gane:
Or aiblins some bit duddie boy,
Right idle would the journey be
Now in the cornfields, now the new-mown hay.
Passes the strength of storms in their most desolate hour.
And there I dream'd, Ah! Woe betide!
I see thee dancing o'er the green,
The reading of an ever-changing tale;
Giving the joy of home delights,
And pledge we ne'er shall sunder;
Soft and peaceful as her breast;
To woo its own sad image into nearness:
Saving, perhaps, some snow-light cadences
In this thy plighted, fond regard,
Or swallow heed on smoke-tanned chimney top,
But, by my gun, o' guns the wale,
Where Scorn her finger points through many a coming year?
This day, Time winds th' exhausted chain,
And fitly may the stranger lingering here
My fathers that name have rever'd on a throne,
And make them blow fire out of coal hardly warm.
Lycius," said he, "for uninvited guest
That frequent pass douce Wisdom's door
I'm your age treble, with some oddments to't,
Who dreads a curtain lecture worse than hell!
Powers celestial! whose protection
Quo' she, wha lives will see the proof.
And they hae sworn a solemn oath
At thy fear'd trident shrinking, doth unlock
She has a hump upon her breast,
Apollo still thy long, long summer gilds,
Cou'd stown a clue wi' onie bodie;
Or call with truth one span of earth their own,
And be alone on earth, as I am now.
A country fellow at the pleugh,
Soon heels-o'er gowdie! in he gangs,
Not vernal show'rs to budding flow'rs,
An' steer you seven miles south o' hell:
Of and unseen,--O were they but a bird!
Of mealy sweets, which myriads of bees
And safe beneath the shady thorn
Now what could artless Jeanie do?
She, well as Jane, was laid within the ground;
Scarce can his clear and nimble eye-sight follow
A light as of four sunsets, blazing forth
Twa dogs that were na thrang at hame,
In fatal penitence, and in the blight
In helpless infants' tears he dipp'd his right,
To bring the summons of warm day's approach,
On Cowper Green I stray, tis a desert strange and chill,
Endymion, with quick hand, the charm applied--
Adieu!" Whereat those maidens, with wild stare,
Instead of a song, boys, I'll give you a toast--
Of earth recoils upon us;--let it go!
Within the same Arena where they see
Than I began to think of rhymes and measures:
'Tis thine to pity and forgive.
If human souls did never kiss and greet?
The Queen of tides on high consenting shone,
Hurl their defiance far, nor yield, unless to gold.
In Saxon times, which we are wont to call
And little footpaths sweet to see
Nor pain nor pity in my bosom raised.
It's now some nine-an'-twenty year,
--Tinged like the willow shoots, the east's young brow
Surely they speak a language whisperingly,
From Heaven itself he may inhale the breeze:
All ye that sleep on beds at night in houses dry and warm,
So thin a breathing, not the spider's shuttle,
This mony a day I've grain'd and gaunted,
Again ye'll charm the vocal air.
The royal wittol Charles, and curse the day
Their various arms that glitter in the air!
Slants over blue dominion. Thy bright team
A greater love through all my essence steal."
There is no depth to strike in: I can see
It thirl'd the heart-strings thro' the breast,
Now swarthy summer, by rude health embrowned,
From such a horror-breathing night.
As bleak-fac'd Hallowmass returns,
Because sweet freedom is their mate,
Who left the all-important cares
When at night-fall among your books we got:
Fresh as a nursing mother, in whose vein
But, oh! thou bitter stepmother and hard,
And here's a hand, my trusty fiere,
O canst thou think to fancy me!
And ev'ry star that blinks aboon,
Whiles all the night thro' fog-smoke white
Ah, what a task! upon my bended knees,
Counts over bed-time's hour of rest,
Ilk stream foaming down its ain green, narrow strath;
This boundless Upas, this all-blasting tree,
Misspending all thy precious hours,
The bristling palisade, the fosse o'erflowed,
On earth I may not love thee; and therefore
As with us mortal men, the laden heart
You plainly in her face may read it,
Accord me such a Being? Do I err
To tint her pallid cheek with bloom, who cons
Dried up, despairing, desolate, on board
Wi' thee to reign, wi' thee to reign,
But wad ye see him in his glee,
Braw, braw lads of Galla Water;
In vain to me, in glen or shaw,
Ye mustering thunders from above,
"The sweeping blast, the sky o'ercast,"
Thus does he poison, kill, an' slay,
And prickly dogrose spite of its array
Adieu to thee again! a vain adieu!
But wha can avoid the fell snare?
Oft have I met your social band,
Shall airy voices cheat me to the shore
Throw in their hints of man's deluding ways;
There they to hunt the luscious fruit delight,
But, whether granted or denied,
The "Pilgrim's Progress" and the "Death of Abel"
And, when again one rambles down
And bumper his horn with him twenty times o'er."
From those kind eyes,--the very home and haunt
An' lea'e us nought but grief and pain,
And flaunting wassailers of high and low degree.
Let me sound an alarm to your conscience:
She shines sae bright to wyle us hame,
A blethering, blustering, drunken blellum;
And mailed hand held out, ready to greet
We eye the rose upon the brier,
Of thy caprice maternal I complain:
Unaided, through thy cursed restriction
I started, mutt'ring, blockhead! coof!
The hour approaches Tam maun ride;
Then let the loons beware, Sir,
Hums songs of shelter to his happy mind.
But ever and anon the glancing spheres,
Through copse-clad vallies,--ere their death, o'ertaking
Many such eves of gently whisp'ring noise
Look'd at each other with a wild surmise--
She draiglet a' her petticoatie,
Peaceful as some immeasurable plain
And whilst that honour warms my breast,
Just five-and-forty years thegither!
To which Diana's marvel was a cell--
To thee my fancy took its wing,
Are blest with Fortune's smiles and favours,
My friends they line disown'd me a',
And on the gliding vessel Heaven and Ocean smiled.
O for some drowsy Morphean amulet!
He stood unbowed beneath the ills upon him piled.
Happy, I ne'er shall see them in decline;
My auld schoolfellow, preacher Willie,
His teeth they chatter, chatter still.
And infant frosts begin to bite,
Such thousands of shut eyes in order plac'd;
Fainted away in that dark lair of night.
That, set him to a pint of ale,
Ye need not giggle underneath your hat,
From natural west, and east, and south, and north,
But who may smile that sinks beneath his fate?
Shall feel the other half so utterly!--
Like ither menseless, graceless brutes.
by sacred truth and honour's band!
And she forgot the blue above the trees,
Thy memory will waste me to a shade:--
The verdure and pride of the garden and lawn!
But monie daily weet their weason
With anguish moist and fever dew,
Then to the blessed New Jerusalem,
When to the lochs the curlers flock,
She's fair and fause that causes my smart,
As if because her tale was at an end
The village, glittering in the noontide beam--
As e'er God with his image blest!
Reft of its carnal life, save what shall be
Rolled fast along the sky his warm and genial moon.
Blythe Jenny sees the visit's no ill ta'en;
Displays, red glowing in the morning wind,
And Mammon wins his way where Seraphs might despair.
Some grace the maiden's artless smile;
From human pastures; or, O torturing fact!
But not for panegyric I appear,
Kind Nature's care had given his share,
Dalrymple has been lang our fae,
To meet with noble youthful Daer,
They held them strait and tight;
To cast a worthless offering at thy shrine,
Say, such is royal George's will,
Beheld her Iris.--Thou, too, lonely Lord,
Tho' to be rich was not my wish,
It ceas'd: yet still the sails made on
But wherefore set upon a saddle
Ev'n day, all-bitter, brings relief,
And Jack the Giant-killer's high renown.
That rebel Jove's whole armoury were spent,
That distance of recognizance bereaves,
I've notic'd, on our Laird's court-day,
Thro' many a wild romantic grove,
Which answers to all doubts so eloquently well.
Against their blind omnipotence a weight
The hidden music; gets but little way
To more immediate objects, and control
And see the spangly gloom froth up and boil:
And blotched leaved orchis, and the blue bell flowers;
Crowd round the shallows by the striding brig.
Could leave both man and horse behind;
With lusty arm. You know that huge round beam
Her cheeks a mair celestial hue,
More than thy meanest soldier taught to yield;
He sprang from his green covert: there she lay,
Of a peculiar sort,--a consummation;--
(Who knows not that brave Caledonia's divine?)
To set my dull and sadden'd spirit playing?
Howling tempests, o'er me rave!
Here will I kneel, for thou redeemed hast
Should be--and shall, survivor of its woe,
While Willie lap, and swoor, by jing,
Full many a flower, too, wishing to be seen,
Sad was the parting thou makes me remember,
But a' the niest week as I fretted wi' care,
Sweet as blue heavens o'er enchanted isles.
And smile as thou were wont to do?
O ye douce folk, that live by rule,
Abrupt, in middle air, his way was lost;
Ev'n then, sometimes we'd snatch a taste
fairy familiars that we know and treat as one of ourselves.
Parting wi' Nancy, oh! ne'er to meet mair.
Dream within dream!"--"She took an airy range,
As much as here is penn'd doth always find
So grim, deform'd, with horrors entering U,
Whose walls o'erlook the stream; and drawing nigh,
Unmoulds its essence, hopelessly deformed
Before the first of Druids was a child;--
Pictures of power, which if not doomed to win
Sour Bigotry, on her last legs,
And monitor me nightly to lone slumber.
And then all the world, Sir, should know it!
Brushing, awakened: then the sounds again
Their ripen'd fruitage; yellow girted bees
Who calls thee, pert, affected, vain coquette,
And if ye canna bite ye can bark,
When anger hurried on the heels of fear,
And rusty flitches decorate the walls,
All lovers, whom fell storms have doom'd to die
In moral mercy, truth and justice!
When some ethereal and high-favouring donor
And come instead demurest meditation,
Why were they proud? Because their marble founts
Now, when the frost was past enduring,
How vain for me the niggard Muse to tease:
Speckled with countless fleeces? Have not rains
Bonnie wee thing, cannie wee thing,
A place where woman never smiled or wept;
Turn out on her guard in the clap of a hand;
Mair braw than when they're fine;
Is it a scarf that thy fair lady gave?
Their title's avow'd by my country.
The lang lad they ca' jumpin' John
That, while it smote, still guaranteed to save.
Whose sovereign statute is order;
Now there--they're packed aff to hell,
My task is done--my song hath ceased--my theme
And gentle tale of love and languishment?
Keeping their merry pranks a mystery still,
Soon was he quieted to slumbrous rest:
This cannot be thy hand, and yet it is;
To slowly trace the forest's shady scene,
And moody crows beside the road forbear
Conscious, blushing for our race,
Soul--heart--mind--passions--feelings--strong or weak--
Kingdoms are shrunk to provinces, and chains
To see the new come laden, groaning,
And to examine it in secret place:
Should he give up awhile his penny pelf,
She's twisted right, she's twisted left,
I fear ye'll bide till break o' day;
Spake fair Ausonia; and once more she spake
But may ye flourish like a lily,
Spare my luve, ye winds that blaw,
But if thou would flourish immortal in rhyme,
And talks of stock: and when his jobs are done
Yet ruined Splendour still is lingering there.
And perish with the reed on which they leant;
The flaunting flowers our gardens yield,
To the chief intensity: the crown of these
The chubby urchins from the village hie
Put her new lips to his, and gave afresh
Her air like nature's vernal smile,
And man, whose heaven-erected face
But lets it sometimes pace abroad majestical,
Outshining and o'erwhelming edifice
Me not the noise of brawling pleasure cheers,
And triumph, as in thee I should rejoice
And yet, wi' funny, queer Sir John,
I see thy streaming hair! and now, by Pan,
Auld hermit Ayr staw thro' his woods,
Matted and massed together--hillocks heaped
Nor warlike worshipper his vigil keeps
Nor could an arrow light, or javelin,
Are seldom missing from his Sunday table,
To traverse Acarnania's forest wide,
In vain the gout his ancles fetters;
And left him once again in twilight lone.
The critics' wrath did darkly frown
So faint a kindness, such a meek surrender
Rapt in a deep prophetic solitude.
A silent man in life's affairs,
Full of sweet dreams, and health, and quiet breathing.
(Fled, like the sun eclips'd as noon appears,
There's wooden walls upon our seas,
And thy still matchless tongue that conquers all reply.
Till fley'd awa by Phoebus' light.
Thou surely canst not bear a mind in pain,
Has he been wandering in uncertain ways:
Whan thousands thou hast left in night,
On the arena void--seats crushed--walls bowed--
E'en now, dear George, while this for you I write,
Preserves alike its bounds and boundless fame
To waft me from distraction; once I loved
And let there glide by many a pearly car,
Clarens! by heavenly feet thy paths are trod,--
Lays have I left of such a dear delight
On humbler thoughts, and let this strange assay
Thro' dirt and dub for life I'll paidle,
That he had died, that cruel father!
Seest thou thy lover lowly laid?
The motions of their vessel; Nature's law,
And, stretching neck to that and this,
Aye, even as dead-still as a marble man,
And more, it may be, than I hoped or sought;
As fair in form, as warm yet pure in heart,
As gathering sweet flow'rets she stems thy clear wave.
And happiness?-A bubble on the stream,
The boy who is her best delight,
The hole where her blue eggs in safety lie.
Altho' his carnal wit an' sense
The which became more strange, and strange, and dim,
Bring home increase of milk. And, as the year
Thou, Toothache, surely bear'st the bell
For there was soft Remembrance, and sweet Trust
In which the heavy and the weary weight
If one of her soft ringlets I displace,
As now my distraction no words can express!
As weary flocks around me pant,
Where my leader breath'd his last,
There low he lies, in lasting rest;
Some seek devotion--toil--war--good or crime,
The paltry jargon of the marble mart,
In these savage, liquid plains,
For a' his gold and white monie,
From the rich sunset to the rising star,
And scarcely startles, though the shepherd goes
Farewell to them all while in prison I lie--
Sheep feeding by the pasture rills,
Beheld it last by Calpe's rock  unfold
Supper removed, the mother sits,
My lady's white, my lady's red,
How joyously and happily would Love thy partner go;
And rippling waters made a pleasant moan:
But eagles golden-feather'd, who do tower
As fair art thou, my bonnie lass,
The Saint, the Father, and the Husband prays:
How saucy Phoebus' scorching beams
Cruel enchantress! So above the water
A greedy glowr Black Bonnet throws,
My heart is a-breaking, dear Tittie!
Is this the only cure? Merciful God?
The blood-stained roost, and sheep-cote spoiled
I rather wad bear a' the lade o' my sorrow
The milk of his own gift: it is her Sire
Seek, mangled wretch, some place of wonted rest,
The pipers and youngsters were making their game;
An', faith! thou's neither lag nor lame,
But these between a silver streamlet  glides,
That Pow'r which rais'd and still upholds
Leeze me on rhyme! it's aye a treasure,
That we may brag, we hae a lass
And with the sky--the peak--the heaving plain
Already one strong hold of hope is lost,
Awaiting the smith as he wanted a shoe;
Knowledge of objects,--wonders yet to thee!
Flow gently, sweet Afton, disturb not her dream.
My true love! she cried, and sank down by his side,
Be blest with health, and peace, and sweet content!
Will trace the story of Endymion.
Whereat was heard a noise of painful toil,
Of fair-hair'd Milton's eloquent distress,
A wooer like me mamma hope to come speed;
To me was all in all.--I cannot paint
By this, friend Charles, you may full plainly see
Such noise is like the roar of bleak-grown pines;
Flaffan wi' duds an' grey wi' beas',
To see the bit tailor come skippin' again.
And by example illustrate the fact
And gowden flowers sae rare upon't;
And garlands woven of flowers wild, and sweet,
No man with the half of 'em e'er went quite right;--
She came, and thou didst fade, and fade away--
And doth the Power that man adores ordain
These forms of beauty have not been to me,
And he beholds the moon, and hush'd at once
Life gave him comfort but denied him wealth,
My illness was love, though I knew not the smart,
Of happy changes in emphatic dreams,
Nor break the feeblest link of sleep:
Tho' I maun own, as monie still
Till they were turned unto thine overthrow:
Night-swollen mushrooms? Are not our wide plains
To warn you how that Master Tootie,
Her heaving bosom, lily-white--
Note that eye, 'tis rheum o'erflows,
When I was young, a single man.
'Twas the dear smile when naebody did mind us,
Partly wi' love o'ercome sae sair,
Glistning, while many a glow-worm in the shade
Yet, dearer than my deathless soul,
The pewit turned over and stooped oer my head
To guard those relics ne'er to be restored:--
I play'd my fillie sic a shavie,
The whiteness of his soul--and thus men o'er him wept.
O never, never, Scotia's realm desert;
Had marr'd his glossy hair which once could shoot
Ye'll soon hae poets o' the Scottish nation,
Of which the world's rude friends,
And she is far liker Death than he;
Bright signal that she only stoop'd to tie
And only blind from sheer supremacy,
Sighing an elephant appear'd and bow'd
Among the heathy hills and ragged woods
Thy lightsome step sheds joy in every place;
But cast a moment's fair regard,
And far more weighty than conjecture brings;
The cantie auld folks crackin' crouse,
Of help from Dian: so that when again
Scorched by the Roman Jove's ethereal dart,
Will be elysium--an eternal book
"I will not harm her, by all saints I swear,"
Its tempering coolness, to my life akin,
And in the morning's pearly dew;
They fight for Freedom who were never free,
Bent on slaughter, blood, and spoil:
And Time himself hath hallowed it, nor laid
For I have long time been my fancy feeding
And crept through half closed lattices to cure
Whose dewy leafits are but half disclos'd,
The bitter little that of life remains:
For gear to gang that gate at last!
Were of more soft ascent than lazar stairs?--
There ne'er was a coward o' Kenmure's blude,
Her face was large as that of Memphian sphinx,
Good Kosciusko, thy great name alone
I'll ne'er blame my partial fancy,
Wrought suddenly in me. What indeed more strange?
Our minds shall drink at every pore
Convention is the dwarfish demon styled
His lordship sat wi' rueful e'e,
With a just weapon, it had flowed unbound;
Men wha grew wise priggin' owre hops an' raisins,
While scabs an' botches did him gall,
Are hurrying through the grass to shun the shower.
Nae mair the Council waddles down the street,
Then slow raise Marjory o' the Lochs
An' sends, beside, auld Scotland's cash
This wretched woman thither goes,
The wounds I must hide that will soon be my dead.
Where gathering flowers and busking bowers,
He watched the billows' melancholy flow,
She frowns offended when they call her fat--
Your humble servant then no more;
Wi' deils, they say, L--d save's! colleaguin'
Still without intermission speaking thus:
of 1835-6. Perhaps it is unjust to Clare to consider them out of their
Of their dear friends, nigh foolish with delight;
Hee balou! my sweet wee Donald,
Sends ane to heaven, and ten to hell,
And hollos as he buzzes bye "kew kew."
And all can know she wears a pretty face.
Be careful, ere ye enter in, to fill
I think my wife will end her life
Then to the dogs resign the unburied slain,
With accents wild and lifted arms--she cried;
Till wi' their logic-jargon tir'd,
And what is Life?--An hour-glass on the run,
There's a' the pleasures o' the heart,
His latest draught o' breathin' lea'es him
While idly lies, nor wanted more,
Then hey the chaste interest o' Broughton,
And mony a night we've merry been,
Stood stupefied with my own empty folly,
Words which are things,--hopes which will not deceive,
Yet must I tell a tale of chivalry:
For the boy Jupiter: and here, undimm'd
Ye Mauchline bairns, as on ye press
Had I na got greetin', my heart wad a broken,
Me he sought through frost and snow.
In midst of all lay Themis, at the feet
We once have loved, though Love is at an end:
Sing, ho my braw John Highlandman!
Let fragrant birks in woodbines drest
Not Gowrie's rich valleys, nor Forth's sunny shores,
Come, draw a drap o' the best o't yet;
Tawny and gold, ooz'd slowly from far lands
That holy robe, O dinna tear it!
Cured all ambition?  Did the conquerors heap
Moist, cool and green; and shade the violets,
Before the mountains heav'd their heads
Till the blood tinge his plumage--so the heat
Curious daubs his hanging house.
With melting heart, and brimful eye,
Whose toil upholds the glittering show,
Thou smild'st and mad'st him no reply.
I'll look upon your tents again.
This hidden whim; and long they watch'd in vain;
See round thy giant base a brighter choir,
'Tis not through envy of thy happy lot,
We put our eyes into a pillowy cleft,
Cover'd with crystal vines; then weeping trees,
Oh, God! that thou wert in thy nakedness
'Twas well enough when summer came,
Deformed remnants of the Fairy-days.
Poisonous about my ears, and louder grew,
As if, athirst with so much toil, 'twould sip
The little things around, like you and I,
Chace him away, sweet Hope, with visage bright,
And beat her out by ending it in prose.
Soon in a pleasant chamber they are seated;
That round the pathless wand'rer pours,
He could shoe the king's hunter the best in the land;
So, little Master Wagtail, I'll bid you a good-bye.
O for a Shakspeare or an Otway scene,
Seems to give forth its light in very scorn
Groans in death pangs like tempests in the trees.
Not to have dipp'd in love's most gentle stream.
To save poor lambkins from the eagle's maw;
Well done, said the blacksmith with hopes running high;
Suspends his sobs, and laughs most silently,
Made of rose leaves and thistledown, express,
Cheat of his chosen bed, and from the bank
Sylvan historian, who canst thus express
My worthy friend, ne'er grudge an' carp,
And then a little lamb bolts up behind
My shepherd lad, to play the fool,
What is her Pyramid of precious stones?
How can I write what ye can read?--
For some black, grousome carlin;
The West must own the Scourger of the world.
Tis death any longer to tarry me,
Thine eyes have scarce a charm for me.
That overtop your mountains; whether come
Yet when a tale comes i' my head,
The haughty thistle oer all danger towers,
While knaves laugh in their sleeve;
And the bleak battlements shall bear no future blow.
Is gone; and now the wedding-guest
Disturbs my lassie's midnight rest;
But just the pouchie put the nieve in,
When mighty squireships of the quorum
About the dewy forest, whisper tales?--
From the young day when first thy infant hand
A steady splendour; but at the tip-top,
That needs must die, although its little beam
Its knell in princely ears, till the o'erstung
And Johnny burrs and laughs aloud,
Till butter'd so'ns  wi' fragrant lunt,
Into their vision covetous and sly!
With lava kisses melting while they burn,
And all its curtains of Aurorian clouds
And no breeze ever reached us or strained a single sail.
Thus ev'ry kind their pleasure find,
And rose and lilly for the sabbath morn?
On which the shepherd crawls astride to throw
That but for tears my life had fled away!--
Bonnie wee thing, cannie wee thing.
I doubt na fortune may you shore
Young Porphyro, for gazing on that bed;
As I was walking up the street,
Whither I know not; but the hour's gone by,
There's some are fou o' love divine;
And never drink be near his drouth!
Had reach'd the river's brim. Then up he rose,
Enlarge not to my hunger, or I'm caught
Full many a sad and doleful thing:
Convuls'd and headlong! Stay! an inward frown
Some demon's mistress, or the demon's self.
And no a perfect kintra cooser.--
Spun off a drizzling dew,--which falling chill
And half an hour has scarcely passed
So young as to regard men's frown or smile,
The deil ane but honours them highly,--
The boat her silent path pursues!
What is that worst? Nay do not ask--
Left to herself, the serpent now began
They charm th' admiring gazer's sight,
My daring steps: or if thy tender care,
And it had gloomy shades, sequestered deep,
I saw from out the wave her structures rise
"I sit upon this old grey stone,
Farewell awhile to him and thee,
Morn dawns; and with it stern Albania's hills,
The breathless Latmian wonder'd o'er and o'er;
For Eighty-eight he wish'd you weel,
Of Ceres' horn, and, in huge vessels, wine
Oh, Love! no habitant of earth thou art--
What whisperer disturb'd his gloomy rest?
As that of busy spirits when the portals
O happy living things! no tongue
And both may jar: it may be, that in vain
One Queen Artemisia, as old stories tell,
An' tent them duly, e'en an' morn,
Noting the hedger front with stubborn face
But where his rude hut by the Danube lay--
For them, in nature's meads, the milky udder flowed.
Pale Isabella kiss'd it, and low moan'd.
With a deep awe, yet all distinct from fear;
And the distant echoing glens reply.
And fell into a swooning love of him.
And nocht can heal my bosom's smart,
And smoke beneath a burning sky.
There catch her ilka glance of love,
And checks his song to execrate Godoy,
Until into the earth's deep maw he rush'd:
Of swarthy grass; and quickly marred
Delight it; for it feeds upon the burrs,
--For weeks the balmy air breathed soft and mild,
Beneath its rich shade did King Oberon languish,
That lips could speak thy heart could muve.
I'll aulder be gin simmer, Sir.
Yet wast thou patient. Then sang forth the Nine,
There he doth dithering sit, and entertain
Its powerless self: I know this cannot be.
Narcissus pining o'er the untainted spring?
The birth-place of valour, the country of worth;
"See yonder poor, o'erlabour'd wight,
Then from his lordship I shall learn,
I see, and sing, by my own eyes inspired.
Light hoverer around our happy pillows!
And then my fifty pounds a year
Scorches and burns our once serene domain.
Gars me moop wi' the servant hizzie,
Winter winds blew loud and cauld at our parting,
And foam in fetters;--but is Earth more free?
It spak right howe,--"My name is Death,
And can I e'er repay the friendly debt?
And lineage long, it suits me not to say;
O Mary, canst thou wreck his peace,
In every fragment multiplies--and makes
"Come hither, Sister of the Island!" Plain
And the great Sea-King bow'd his dripping head.
Arcadian Pan, with such a fearful dread.
And what our duties there: to nightly call
Auld Tubal-Cain's fire-shool and fender;
Where, man and nature fairer in her sight,
Of this fair world, and all its gentle livers;
Of heaven on the spiritual air begot:
My love's far dwelling. Though the playful rout
For monie a ane has gotten a fright,
We'll walk along the meadow grass,
Tho' faith, I fear, ye dine but sparely
Oft trod, that never leaves a trace behind;
If you but scantily hold out the hand,
Through all the mail of iron hearts would glide;
Three ships of war had we, and the great guns loaded all;
The owls have hardly sung their last,
The deeds that lurk beneath, and stain him with disgrace.
Ah, gentle! 'tis as weak as spider's skein;
'Twixt him and Lusian slave, the lowest of the low.
Shed balmy consciousness within that bower.
These lovers fled away into the storm.
Where meaner relics must not dare to rot,
And yellowhammers gathering the dry bents
The purity of Heaven to earthly joys,
Uncouth-brimmed hat, and weather-beaten cloak,
Which tells you whom to shun and whom to greet:
Far as Egyptian Nile. My passion grew
And, but from the deep cavern there was borne
Till muses melt to honey showers;
Another wish'd, mid that eternal spring,
Flushing his brow, and in his pained heart
The man, in life wherever plac'd,
And tears for idiots vainly fall.
Auld, cantie Kyle may weepers wear,
Her soft look growing coy, she saw his chain so sure:
Eager to sail their orb; the porches wide
By a clear pool, wherein she passioned
"As if she for no purpose bore you;
Her silver sandals, ere deliciously
Then know all ye whom it concerns,
Bright wines and bonnie lasses rare,
The nice yellow guineas for me.
As ye hae generous done, if a' the land
His head through thorny-green entanglement
For tenderness the arms so idly lain
Whose touch turns Hope to dust,--the dust we all have trod.
Aw'd from the throne aloof;--and when storm-rent
O! thou bright queen, who o'er th' expanse
With braided tresses bounding o'er the green,
And gar me look like bluntie, Tam!
To common sense they now appeal,
While yet our England was a wolfish den;
If thou wert there, if thou wert there:
Of thy poor malice, naming thee with scorn:
Poor Andrew that tumbles for sport,
Whence thick, and green, and beautiful it grew,
Bur for wine and for welcome not more known to fame
"Enough, enough, my little lad!
Than speak against this ardent listlessness:
No hollow aid; alone--man with his God must strive:
To the wolf and the vulture he leaves his wild flock,
The song of love, than Andalusia's maids,
After some dog in Highland sang,
For lack o' gear ye lightly me,
If your stuff has the rot, like her heart.
Kind Hunt was shut in prison, yet has he,
With all thy vices--for thou didst lay down
But though he was o' high degree,
Of liny marble, and thereto a train
Whase greed, revenge, an' pride disgraces,
Beneath a craggy steep, a bard,
He's doyl't and he's dozin', his bluid it is frozen,
Now he adventured on a shore unknown,
Beneath his white soft temples, stedfast kept
How virtue and vice blend their black and their white;
Now death and hell engulph thy foes,
Just like a naiad's summer bark.
And o'er her cliffs a fruitless watch to keep
The skill that yet may check his mad career!
Red as the morning sun, he takes his round
While hid the murmuring streamlets flow;
Those silver wings expanded sisterly,
I drest myself just like a prince and Peggy went to woo,
We for the year to come may take
Just within ken, they saw descending thick
By old Saturnus' forelock, by his head
Below grass swells a velvet hill,
There little lambtoe bunches springs
It was the custom then to bring away
I, who still saw the horizontal sun
Waesucks! for him that gets nae lass,
The little babe is buried there,
Ne barrier wall, ne river deep and wide,
One avenue was shaded from thine eyes,
Yields to my step aspirant? why should I
To thee I do devote it--_Thou_ shalt take
The old hawk winnows round the old crow's nest;
He that has sailed upon the dark blue sea
Head-foremost, through the driving rain,
Your mother, she may wrap your waist
Till kye be gaun without the herd,
And he on her would vengeance take.
Till silence and shame stole the use of my tongue:
In death as life? Are they resolved to dust,
A dove-like bosom. In truth there is no freeing
Our souls to compass through each arduous way,
And shouldst thou break it--What, is it done so clean?
That, lingering along a pebbled coast,
And ride on sheep-trays from the fold
The crow he was in love no doubt
But thou wilt live with me in love,
Fresh is the green beneath those aged trees;
Dost thou spurn the humble vale?
Like sorrow came upon me, heavier still,
He goes to market all the year about
Staying their wavy bodies 'gainst the streams,
There blossom'd suddenly a magic bed
Not cabinets even of kings would conceal 'em,
A little moment deigneth to delay:
Might shake the Saintship of an Anchorite,
From off her brow, and left her all alone.
When that strange shape drove suddenly
Their wild-fire lamps are burning bright:
Thought he, "Why am I not as are the dead,
In glens which might have made even exile dear:
And his crime, through the pains that o'erwhelm him, descried,
Not higher than a two-years' child,
The large-eyed wonder, and ambitious heat
But caulder thy love for me, Oh!
That's the law, said the smith, with a look rather vexed,
He lay upon the furrow stretched for dead,
The same delights in visions rise;
On which the iron shower for years had poured in vain.
Then pause, and be enlightened; there is more
Who simply tell the most heart-easing things.
And lo!--whose stedfastness would never take
In blanched linen, smooth, and lavender'd,
My husband's arms now only served to strain
For neither pension, post, nor place,
Turns short, determined to be first the next;
Be nameless wilds and lonely wanderings mine,
Right earlily a-morn do pipe and play
Baited with many a deadly curse?
"Mounted on panthers' furs and lions' manes,
Now westlin winds and slaughtering guns
An' gi'es them't like a tether,
A fresh-blown musk-rose; 'twas the first that threw
For genius, learning high, as great in war--
Of present pleasure, but with pleasing thoughts
An' by my hen, an' by her tail,
I clasp'd her waist, and kiss'd her syne,
O wha my babie-clouts will buy?
And the base pageant  last upon the scene,
I ken thy friends try ilka means,
Thy throne had still been thine, or never been;
How sweetly wind thy sloping dales,
Silent entangler of a beauty's tresses!
Then did the little Maid reply,
Yon wild mossy mountains sae lofty and wide,
And unavenged?--Arise! ye Goths, and glut your ire!
It is to hover round our pleasant hills!
Oh, how they fire the heart devout,
If thou art powerful, these lovers pains;
And we'll tak a cup o' kindness yet,
An' gettin' fou and unco happy,
For all are meteors with a different name,
Though to my hopeless days for ever lost,
I know thine inmost bosom, and I feel
Some fair immortal, and that his embrace
Whilst thou didst pledge the powers above,
Ay, there some dropples moistened on my face,
Her bright course of glory for ever shall run:
Listen, Stranger! Storm and Wind,
Push'd through a screen of roses. Starry Jove!
Your eyes are fix'd, as in poetic sleep,
And we'll be Johnstones a', Jamie.
How tremblingly their delicate ancles spann'd!
And steer 'twixt fertile shores where yet few rustics reap.
And mind your duty, duly, morn and night!
The fumes of wine infuriate send;
Or, it may be, ere matron Night uptook
Within yon milk-white hawthorn bush,
A shout from the whole multitude arose,
Three tongues prefer strange orisons on high;
When nobody whispers to marry me--
With diadem hight Foolscap, lo! a Fiend,
In that same void white Chastity shall sit,
No screen, no fence could I discover,
Felt too, I was not fearful, nor alone,
So fresh in all its beauteous dyes,
And follow all that Peace disdains to seek?
But whether she had three or four,
Pipe to the spirit ditties of no tone:
When Madeline, St. Agnes' charmed maid,
A fever seized him, and he made confession
While I see little mouldiwarps hang sweeing to the wind
Numbering ilka bud which nature
And, lang ere witless Jeanie wist,
In deeds, not years,  piercing the depths of life,
The glorious Main expanding o'er the bow,
Which o'er-informs  the pencil and the pen,
To summon all the downiest clouds together
There at them thou thy tail may toss,
With furious speed rush to the charge,
Or by Madrid he takes the rout,
Wept that such beauty should be desolate:
Did they not to her breast their filial earth entrust?
Then farewell folly, hide and hair o't,
Yet there was not a breath of wind: she banish'd
And flies unconscious o'er each backward year;
The point of misery fest'ring in his heart,
The _now_ since then has crept between,
If friendless, low, we meet together,
And dares the public like a noontide sun.
He had a fever late, and in the fit
Though oft I turn'd the wistful eye,
As fast as ony in the dwalling.
The lads sae trig, wi' wooer babs,
As those are high, descend! He ne'er is crown'd
That shaw'd the dead in their last dresses;
Could I describe her shape and mien;
With him," said I, "will take a pleasant charm;
When flow'r-reviving rains are past;
My dispossessor? Have ye seen his face?
Wild strawberries which both gathered then,
And Vesper, risen star, began to throe
How sweet to be thus nestling deep in boughs,
The rugged founts of the Peræan rills,
Yestreen at the Valentine's dealing,
It is in vain that we would coldly gaze
Yet must I think less wildly:--I _have_ thought
Beauties of deeper glance, and hear their singing,
To her twa een sae bonnie blue.
Who late so free as Spanish girls were seen,
But soon she came, with sudden burst, upon
Pale, lattic'd, chill, and silent as a tomb.
Starting, while they the tales recall,
From his green prison, and here kneeling down
Howe'er disguised in its own majesty,
My lips were wet, my throat was cold,
Thus wording timidly among the fierce:
A little time, and then again he snatch'd
With the tinge of love, panting in safe alarm.--
The pompous strain, the sacerdotal stole;
Their donsie tricks, their black mistakes,
Though Beauty long hath there been matchless deemed,
I saw thee lovely and I wished thee mine,
She is not the fairest, altho' she is fair;
Then echo thro' Saint Stephen's wa's
Among the throng. His youth was fully blown,
By sweet enforcement and remembrance dear,
And fleeting shores receded from his sight,
Have all burst forth in choral minstrelsy,
Upon a weeded rock this old man sat,
Can I admire how crystal-smooth it felt,
Among the wheat and on the green,
(Deil na they never mair do guid,
But when, O Wells! thy roses came to me
My trunk of eild, but buss or bield,
"Our lords are to the mountains gane,
Whose congregated majesty so fills
Heart-sickening for the silence that is thine,
Where the broad sheepwalk bare and brown
And as we show beyond that Heaven and Earth
Ye see your state wi' theirs compar'd,
Here the Albanian proudly treads the ground;
That when a Poet is in such a trance,
Watching the sailing cloudlet's bright career,
For others, good or bad, hatred and tears
Give me your tool" to him I said;
Gathering sweets from little flowers like stars.
Wha in the paths o' righteousness did toil ay;
But still the hope Experience taught to live,
But woman, nature's darling child!
That to a bard I should be seen
they are the small or dwarfish portion of our own family, and so many
And laughing joy, with wild flowers pranked and crowned,
Alfonso! how thy ducal pageants shrink
Complete and ready for the revels rude,
I wad in vain essay the strain,
And scattered cities crowning these,
Look on this spot--a Nation's sepulchre!
Tired of up-gazing still, the wearied eye
His empty arms together, hung his head,
Its sweet-scented bells over desolate graves.
Until that grove appear'd, as if perchance,
While sordid sons o' Mammon's line
I gat it frae a young brisk sodger laddie,
And onward to another city speeds.
High-minded and unbending William Wallace.
Our quiet house all full in view,
Curse on his perjur'd arts! dissembling smooth!
But stilt, but still, I like them dearly--
Deil tak the hindmost, on they drive,
As high in air the bursting torrents flow,
Mall's nit lap out wi' pridefu' fling,
My days once numbered--should this homage past
'Till, fuff! he started up the lum,
The fient a pride, nae pride had he,
Dawn'd blue and full of love. Aye, he beheld
The Ice did split with a Thunder-fit;
While through the seaman's hand the tackle glides;
But Thou, exulting and abounding river!
And yet, sublime in grief, thy thoughts delight
To end the wark here's Whistlebirk,
And in the midst of all, a clearer pool
Or will he touch me with his searing hand,
Wae worth the man wha first did shape
"I never saw aught like to them
Ye jarring, screeching things around,
Is--is it to be so? No! Who will dare
Lands of the dark-eyed Maid and dusky Moor
Into the sun-rise, o'er the balustrade
The curtain draws o' nature's rest,
Sleep, whence thou shalt ne'er awake,
And gif ye canna bite, ye may bark.
The life she lived in--but the Judge was just--
And now, from forth the gloom their plumes immense
He utter'd, while his hands contemplative
Large froth before me, while there yet remain'd
See wha tak's notice o' the bard
Where toil's rude uproar hums from morn till night
Weel, my babie, may thou furder:
The flow'r amang our barons bold,
Still louder shrieks, and heavier groans!
Supremely blest wi' love and thee,
An' there will be Kenmure  sae gen'rous,
From the worn top of some old battlement
O thou, who kindly dost provide
I never can please him, do a' that I can;
But Whigs came like a frost in June,
Anon he leaps along the oaken floors
And weel he lik'd to shed their bluid,
And there shall be a kind memorial graven.
Lone from your savage homes exiled,
Shall at the death of summer die.
But Silence spreads the couch of ever welcome Rest.
But on the viewless wings of Poesy,
The wind waves oer the meadows green
Lies a deep hollow, from whose ragged brows
Where we threw the pismire crumbs when we'd nothing else to do,
Into thine arms; to scare Aurora's train,
And yet the tears she wept were tears of sorrow;
Or by the song of Erin pierc'd and sadden'd:
For days the shepherds in the fields may be,
Beat round, to sweep the streets of want and pain.
When angels met, at Adam's yett,
His even breast: see, many steeled squares,
The hoarse command, the busy humming din,
View the wither'd beldam's face--
Which, in a wink, to watery gauze refin'd,
When Marathon became a magic word;
A dizzy depth below! his boat and twinkling oar.
And little rills of crimson wine imbrued
Delighted with the dashing roar;
To this did Johnny answer make,
Came blushing, waning, willing, and afraid,
And thus spake on that ancyent man,
Ye duck and drake, wi' airy wheels
Ben i' the spence, right pensivelie,
So near, that if no nearer it had been
That form'd this fair sae far awa,
As merry as the birds in spring.
No other light shall guide my steps
Her thoughts are bent on deadly sin;
Albion was happy in Athena's tears?
With belt, and spur, and bracing huntsman's dress.
He may associate Joy! Once more farewell,
For a bit of the halter still hung at the door,
I never failed to gain the honours sought,
He taks a swirlie auld moss-oak,
To land was perilous, to sojourn more;
Stifling that puny essence in its tent.
Call on thy gentle spirit to hover nigh
In livery dress half sables and half red,
When earthquakes jar their battlements and towers.
But when I needed thee the most
Most like with joy gone mad, with sorrow cloy'd.
Their spirits are an Iris of the skies,
The cold, cold moon above her head,
Fient haet o' them's ill-hearted fellows;
That bide the pelting of the pitiless storm!
There's Duncan, deep, and Peebles, shaul,
The gust o' joy, the balm of woe,
When Guildford good our pilot stood,
More subtle cadenced, more forest wild
And mony a knight, and mony a laird,
Of winter hoar. Then came another crowd
Where she hides her golden breast, bonny Mary O!
Fair youth, beneath the trees, thou canst not leave
In what diviner moments of the day
"O brightest of my children dear, earth-born
Are these _her_ naked ribs, which fleck'd
With deep-drawn sighs was quieting, he went
I see the old, bald-pated follow,
There lay her shining eggs, as bright as flowers,
My former pleasures in the shooting lights
Whose grandsire's name adorns the title page,
Wi' deepening deluges o'erflow the plains;
Began calm-throated. Throughout all the isle
Of potters wandering on from door to door:
Amid this general dance and minstrelsy;
"Oh! what a wretched mother I!"
They never sought in vain, that sought the Lord aright!"
Thou diest unwept as thou livedst unlov'd.
Of whisperers in anger, or in sport;
I swear, I'm thine for ever, O!--
To join those miserable men he flew;
When hedges left at night, no more descried,
To run about the yard and ramp and noise
Endymion follow'd--for it seem'd that one
Had I a cave on some wild, distant shore,
How best o' chiels are whiles in want.
But never mind; this ivy, for an hour,
More than the stir of summer's crowded scenes,
Is in its infancy. The man, whose eye
I loved my children more and more.
In Heaven itself I'll ask no more
Forlorn, my love, no comfort near,
O'er the day's fair, gladsome e'e,
And so she kneeled, with her locks all hoar,
She turn'd, and down the aged gossip led
With fleeces newly washen clean,
A butterfly, with golden wings broad parted,
Of all Art yields, and Nature can decree;
More than enough, thou fatal Waterloo!
Or through the mining outlet bocked,
So after my own heart! I knew, I knew
Give me with gay Folly to live;
To think, and think, and think again;
By the blue rushing of the arrowy  Rhone,
Ha'e had a bitter black out-cast
That could sae bitter draw the tear,
More dead than Morpheus' imaginings:
Where the wild beasts find shelter, but I can find none;
All tenderest birds there find a pleasant screen,
Leucadia's far-projecting rock of woe,
The L--d be thankit that we've tint the gate o't!
Quo' she, my grandsire left me gowd,
Of laurel chaplets, and Apollo's glories;
I turn'd my head in fear and dread,
And, by the moon-beam, shook to see
The Ice was here, the Ice was there,
He seem'd to taste a drop of manna-dew,
I never knew a foreign face so rare.
Have I.--She ceased, and weeping turned away,
Placed in the parlour, richly there revealed
And, like a poor pedlar, he's carried his pack;
Leaving thee to thy sleep like an angel at rest,
No view nor care, but shun whate'er
Look abroad through nature's range,
Striking the electric chain wherewith we are darkly bound;
John Barleycorn was a hero bold,
She lay like some unkenn'd-of isle
Though hundreds worship at his word,
With love so sudden and so sweet.
There's none to help poor Susan Gale,
A race of faces happy as the scene,
There is a spot should not be passed in vain,--
And, at the last, a diamond balustrade,
And I'll be his, and he'll be mine,
A flower--the wind--the Ocean--which shall wound,
Measur'st in desperate thought--a rope--thy neck--
While the old Sybil forged her boding clack,
Where Lusitania and her Sister meet,
The ground, with cautious tread, is traversed o'er,
Dearest of sisters, what my life shall be;
And to the fields his road would take,
Scotland lament frae coast to coast!
Poor tottering dame, it was too plainly known,
I feel thy little fingers press'd.
The usual law for their ungodly sin
Though feminine, than any of her sons:
He stood up in quiet, and hung down his head,
'Twas, as if darting from her heavenly throne,
Thy snawie bosom sunward spread,
Fleet as an arrow through unfathom'd brine,
Fame that will scarce reanimate their clay,
And sprang upon poor Goody Blake.
That frae November till October,
Thou'rt like themselves so lovely,
And, sunk albeit in thought as he was wont,
But what can give pleasure, or what can seem fair,
Brightest climes shall mirk appear,
A tocher's nae word in a true lover's parle,
Should make all nature lovelier, and itself
O'er the waves that sweetly glide
To pull a cowslip as she used to do:
Lest in temptation's path ye gang astray,
Sweeping, eye-earnestly, through almond vales:
In longitude tho' sorely scanty,
To the Mind's purified beings; 'twas the ground
--Such was thy ruin, music-making elm;
And in his hearing there my prayers I said:
From their low palfreys o'er his neck they bent:
An' when wi' Usquabae we've wat it
"Love, Isabel!" said he, "I was in pain
One sees a fairer cowslip than the rest,
For the mere sake of truth; as 'tis a ditty
An' whare will ye get Howes and Clintons
And with melodious chuckle in the strings
And I were ne'er sae wearie, O,
Did not poor birds with watching rounds
Churches built to please the priest.
A cannie errand to a neebor town:
"This whistle's your challenge--to Scotland get o'er,
Moan hither, all ye syllables of woe,
Our children should obey her child, and blessed
Long since, this world's thorny ways
Run de'ils for rantin' an' for noise;
Lives there a man so firm, who, while his heart
Far from the narrow bounds of thy dominions.
Awaiting for Hyperion's command.
As if her very life would fail.
When the dark streets appeared to heave and gape,
Along the pebbled shore of memory!
Whyles scour'd awa in lang excursion,
Meant but to fertilize my earthly root,
In hearts all rocky now the late remorse of Love.
Deeper darkness stealing round,
Smooth as the freestone of the wall, and very dear to me.
Nae mate to help, nae mate to cheer,
Hurry distracted from Sol's temperate beam,
The paly moon rose in the livid east,
Who, equal to the bustling strife,
On hazard, or what general bounty yields,
Of joyless day-light; when the fretful stir
They pass'd the city gates, he knew not how,
I saw thee eye the general mirth
But, should my Author health again dispense,
Ah! Spain! how sad will be thy reckoning-day,
I looked and looked along the silent air,
Already, a more healthy countenance?
Like such a bird, themselves would be too proud
They were true Glory's stainless victories,
O, what a panic's in thy breastie!
There, Learning, with his Greekish face,
As hot as death's is chill, with fierce convulse
And there, like all whose last thoughts turn to heaven,
And staidly paces higher up, and higher,
From stately nave to nave, from vault to vault,
As fire with air loud warring when rain-floods
My fire is dead: it knew no pain;
Deal Freedom's sacred treasures free as air,
There centum per centum, the cit with his purse;
The walk will find some places still and warm
The moment he comes in he lyes him down
Beneath the wildwood's oak-tree bough
May health and peace, with mutual rays,
"Why do you shudder, love, so ruefully?
First heaven, then hell, and then forgotten clear,
Of Saturn; tell me, if this wrinkling brow,
While the old heron from the lonely lake
That, nane excell'd it, few cam near't,
That screamed full dreadful in his ear,
I do, I do.--What is this soul then? Whence
Deliver me from this rapacious deep!"
Of moody texture from their earliest day,
Sworn foe to sorrow, care, and prose,
Who had beheld Belphoebe in a brook,
And wandering sounds, slow-breathed melodies;
And Livy's pictured page!--but these shall be
And there sits in a scarlet cloak,
Thus all obscure, unknown, and poor,
Or perhaps, to show their black, and golden wings,
Ye banks, and braes, and streams around
He watch'd to seize old Goody Blake.
The grave sage hern thus easy picks his frog,
Are those _her_ Sails that glance in the Sun
Or is it thy dewy hand the daisy tips?
Sin' that day Michael did you pierce,
She leaves the unfinished tale, in pain,
So, heavy, passive to the tempest's shocks,
Because Lorenzo came not. Oftentimes
I swear and vow by moon and stars,
But knew the names of birds, and mocked their notes,
And, foolish still, I'll laugh the while;
A waefu' wanderer seeks thy tow'r,
Wrote on the almanack behind the screen.
The best on a' the shore o' Bucky.
From the cross timber of an out-house hung;
Wi' wicked strings o' hemp or hair!
And ten times sooner than be warned by me,
An' can we forget the auld major,
(And aye a rowth, roast beef and claret;
Pooties in wreaths above the cupboard hung.
Proud o' the height o' some bit half-lang tree:
If any said 'twas love: and yet 'twas love;
He's danc'd awa, he's danc'd awa,
While Tasso's page was floating in a breeze
So fell the pride of all my hopes,
"Ay, ay!" quo' he, an' shook his head,
Came gold around me, cheering me to cope
Are swallow'd all, and made a seared dearth,
The ooze-born Goddess beckoned and drew
That, any longer, I will pass my days
Then slowly climb the many-winding way,
How slow ye move, ye heavy hours;
That they might see each other while they almost slept;
I had been grieving at this joyous hour.
But lapp'd and lull'd along the dangerous sky.
Where woven boughs shut out the moon's bright ray,
That the sweet buds which with a modest pride
Sin' I began to nick the thread,
There have been tears and breaking hearts for thee,
If bringing them over was lucky for us,
To the swift treble pipe, and humming string.
God's image rudely etch'd on base alloy!
Join dance with shadowy Hours; while still the blast,
In smoothest silence, save what solemn tubes,
Far from thy bonnie banks and braes,
An' pownies reek in pleugh or braik,
There stood a marble altar, with a tress
I sing of a whistle, a whistle of worth,
E'en like the passage of an angel's tear
From the rest, a blest release,
He never will be out of humour.
The crafty colonel  leaves the tartan'd lines,
While chickering crickets, tremulous and long,
The sparrow on the cottage rig,
When wanton Wealth her mightiest deeds hath done,
Self-exiled Harold wanders forth again,
"I would have thee my only friend, sweet maid!
Blown by the serious Zephyrs, gave of sweet
A burning forehead, and a parching tongue.
"Gie dreeping roasts to countra lairds,
But such a love is mine, that here I chase
I heard and in my soul discern'd
No, nor till cordially you shook my hand
Now, as stretching oer the bed,
A pallid gleam across his features stern:
Hyena foemen, and hot-blooded lords,
On the hopeless future pondering;
Had been pollution unto aught so chaste;
His gear may buy him kye and yowes,
Then Burnewin comes on like Death
Full from the fount of Joy's delicious springs
In sooth 'twere sad to thwart their noble aim
But 'tis not my sufferings thus wretched, forlorn:
And didst thou not, thy breast to his replying,
As he was carried oer the green.
Pipe rustic ballads upon busy wings
The space between.--Green light did pass
One moment with his hand among the sweets:
Brings home a cowslip root in flower to set.
Can yield to me nothing but sorrow.
What mair hae queens upon a throne?
Shall leave on the beach the long galley and oar,
The soaring lark, the perching red-breast shrill,
Be but the essence of deformity,
The grass it shook upon the ground;
O Music, Music, breathe despondingly!
Life short, and truth a gem which loves the deep,
Each robber chief upheld his arméd halls,
However mighty in the olden time;
O senseless Lycius! Madman! wherefore flout
Time cannot aid me, my griefs are immortal,
Yes, moonlight Emperor! felicity
To comprehend, but never love thy verse;
That penance which their holy rites prepare
Ploughed lands, thin travelled with half-hungry sheep,
Of aught but rest; a fever at the core,
(O Fergusson! thy glorious parts
But every shot and every knock,
And gratefu' still I hope ye'll ever find us,
In the old flag-pool, on the pasture, drowned.
The gay green-woods amang, man;
Those smiles and glances let me see
Be lov'd, like nature!--But 'twill not be so;
And those, alas! not Amalthea's horn:
She lets thee to wit, that she has thee forgot,
The shepherd to warn o' the gray-breaking dawn,
For oh! her lanely nights are lang;
And make his cottage-scenes beguile
The stranger from the mountains, breathless, trac'd
But here my muse her wing maun cour;
Ah! ça ira! the majesty of woman!
I dream'd I lay where flowers were springing
In the bride's face, where now no azure vein
To where thick myrtle branches, 'gainst his head
Fair Isabella in her downy nest?
That thou should'st smile again?"--The evening came,
To waste in the tavern man's cellar again.
Because my wine was of too poor a savour
Pouring unto us from the heaven's brink.
'Twas all in vain, a useless matter,
There'll be, if that date come, I'll wad a boddle,
Our conquerors to mourn as we do now.
They took a plough and plough'd him down,
Auld uncle John, wha wedlock's joys
The timid hare seems half its fears to lose,
There was no one to ask me why I wept,--
Just at the self-same beat of Time's wide wings
Frae the friends and land I love,
Seems ever near the prize--wealthiest when most undone.
Which, be it Wisdom, Coldness, or deep Pride,
The clouds above me to the white Alps tend,
Of flutes and viols, ravishing his heart,
While she stands chelping bout the town.
Can Despots compass aught that hails their sway?
Love, Fame, Ambition, Avarice--'tis the same,
Came chaste Diana from her shady bower,
They rais'd their limbs like lifeless tools--
Of such new tuneful wonder. Is't not strange
A bright torch, and a casement ope at night,
Therefrom my liberty; thence too I've seen
Tho' by his  banes who in a tub
Weigh down thy nature. Hast thou sinn'd in aught
A certain shape or shadow, making way
He swoor 'twas hilchin Jean M'Craw,
(What scandal call'd Maria's janty stagger
Nor shrinks the female eye, nor ev'n affects to mourn.
Blood follows blood, and, through their mortal span,
The horsepond where he dips his wings,
Without their aid the others float away,
Bad luck on the pennie that tempted my minnie
Which filled the Imperial Isles so full it seemed to cloy.
When remembrance wracks the mind,
Thy hand by unwelcome pressing, would not fear
Age shakes Athenæ's tower, but spares gray Marathon.
Their scantly leaved, and finely tapering stems,
Was keepit for his honour's pleasure;
Of bastard Cæsar, following him of old
The deil's awa, the deil's awa,
It was a jasmine bower, all bestrown
Wi' mony a vow, and lock'd embrace,
A wreath which Fame creates and bears,
His flunkies answer at the bell;
And mark'd with many a seamy scar:
It seems as if I had thine inmate known,
For the soothsayers old saw yesternight
Why shrinks my soul half blushing, half afraid,
A cotton dress her morning gown,
Even where the thickest of War's tempest lowered,
And through their Bible talked aloud to God;
Sweet Hope, ethereal balm upon me shed,
How kindly thou wouldst cheer me,
My journey will be shortly run,
Ev'n ministers, they ha'e been kenn'd,
And blooming Keith's engaged with Gray)
And listens the lambkins that bleat o'er the braes,
At Cleopatra's feet,--and now himself he beamed,
Her lips, whose kisses pout to leave their nest,
Then up among the lakes and seas
Or friends by him self-banished;  for his mind
Or under any hedge his house is made.
Wi' gratefu' heart I thank you brawlie;
Which, ebbing, leave a sterile track behind,
Or faith! I'll wad my new pleugh-pettle,
The poetry of earth is never dead:
With tears, and smiles, and honey-words she wove
To these founts Protean, passing gulph, and dell,
I'm baith dead sweer, an' wretched ill o't;
When Ruin, with his sweeping besom,
The cock may craw, the day may daw,
He smokes a pipe at night and drinks his beer
'Tis he whom you so long have lost,
While the deep war-drum's sound announced the close of day.
And chiefless castles breathing stern farewells
Ought he can lend he'll no refus't,
But the beauty of love was the blood of my heart.
Of thy capacious bosom ever flow.
Are all finesse in Rob Mossgiel.
Of Art and Piety--Pantheon!--pride of Rome!
Over some precipice; let the hot sun
How here, even here, he first unsheath'd the sword,
Oer the heart's every sense its opiate dews,
Trembling with light upon Mnemosyne.
That glance so brightly at the new sun-rise.
But if grief, self-consumed, in oblivion would doze,
And I maun leave my bonnie Mary.
Whose patient level peeps its crystal eye
Made by some mighty oaks: as they would chase
Thou might hae plunged me in hell,
On ev'ry side they're gath'rin',
Or some Montgomery fearless lead them,
In telling of this goodly company,
And lovely form were envied, praised, and eyed
"You seem there in the quiet of content,
Horribly beautiful! but on the verge,
With quivering ore: 'twas even an awful shine
Softly the breezes from the forest came,
An' now she's like to rin red-wud
That wander thro' the blooming heather;
Standing with half its battlements alone,
Long shall the voyager, with th' Ionian blast,
But gleg as light are lovers' een,
Perhaps, with head and heels on fire,
Some weeks have pass'd since last I saw the spires
The geese in troops come droving up,
Ae night, within the ancient brugh of Ayr,
O leeze me on my spinning-wheel!
These sorry pages; then the verse would soar
I've sturdy bearers, Gude be thankit.
Then a' that ken't him round declar'd
Flowers in my time that every one would praise,
A sister whom he loved, but saw her not
Adieu, my daintiest Dream! although so vast
She charm'd my soul--I wist na how:
Among thy mightier offerings here are mine,
Tho' large the forest's monarch throws
Thro' gentle showers and laughing flowers,
Let Fortune's wheel at random rin,
What is there to plain of? By Titan's foe
Come not, Turks, my cottage nigh;
I see a picture which thy fate displays
Give me no high-flown fangled things,
Lest glaring day should do their secrets ill.
Who had of all that's sweet tasted, and seen,
Said Lamia, "here, upon this floor of clay,
South-westward to Cleone. There she stood
Alas, for Earth, for never shall we see
That time thou didst adorn, with amber studs,
I bought my wife a stane o' lint
The wind disturbs my yellow locks,
O that's the queen of womankind,
At which I wondered greatly, knowing well
Pleasure is oft a visitant; but pain
But deil a foreign tinkler loon
By the bard, what d'ye call him, that wore the black gown;
Along the chapel aisle by slow degrees:
Deserted, void, nor any haunt of mine.
Where, thro' a shapeless breach, his stream resounds,
Ethereal presence:--I am but a voice;
Rome--Rome imperial, bows her to the storm,
The farmer goes jogtrotting to the fair.
And long as kinder eyes a look shall cast
Makes a material for mere knights and squires;
Slove in the milk-pail brimming o'er,
Excuse is ready at the biggest lie--
The fountain of Sublimity displays
Oft as by winding Nith, I, musing, wait
But what care I how few they be?
Truth the best music in a first-born song.
Each wicked scheme for power all stops,
Nor hope dare a comfort bestow:
I shall think of its ruins and think upon thee;
Of jubilee to Dian:--truth I heard!
Than idle ears should pleasure in their woe.
Soon they awoke clear eyed: nor burnt with thirsting,
Upon his knees he sank, pale as smooth-sculptured stone.
As Pluto's sceptre, that my words not burn
The pretty flock which I had reared
O think upon the whole ship's crew, all lost at Bantry Bay.
Such as on lonely Athos may be seen,
Its golden sands, and learn what great Conceptions can.
When some have slept on torture's breast
So I up in the morning before the cock crew
Lies all his length as dead--and lets me go
Lived to themselves, a long lone journey trod,
I see her face the first of Ireland's sons,
She press'd his hand in slumber; so once more
And let the misty mountain winds be free
And childhood's bliss is urging on:
Guess ye how, the jad! I could bear her.
Of little eyes, as though thou wert to shed,
Of man: though no great minist'ring reason sorts
Their winding sheet the bluidy clay,
I'll act with prudence as far's I'm able,
The tongue is left without a sound.
My breath of life, where art thou? High above,
Gude help the day when royal heads
He has cooper'd and cawd a wrang pin in't.
One million times ocean must ebb and flow,
Together intertwin'd and trammel'd fresh:
Twelve sphered tables, by silk seats insphered,
Thee the waves awful bow. Fast, stubborn rock,
What time thou wanderest at eventide
Was the warm tremble of a devout kiss,--
Of feelings fierier far but less severe--
Whether descended from beneath the rocks
See, as they creep along the river side,
The shepherd broke his hook and lost the skin;
At length did cross an Albatross,
Therefore they watch'd a time when they might sift
And for the little infant's bones
And wave thy silver pinions o'er my head!
Nor saved your brethren ere they sank beneath
Bean fields in blossom almost reached the wall;
He stooped to get a worm, and looked up to get a fly,
Life ne'er exulted in so rich a prize
The seal Love's dimpling finger hath impressed
Bow'd a fair greeting to these serpents' whine;
Ye maun conceal till your last hour;
As over them a gnarled staff she shook.
Are black with bramble berries--where in haste
She sank within my arms, and cried,
Untill the beesom and the shovel gain
But ay the tear comes in my e'e,
There's neither horse nor man abroad,
In other worlds can Mammon fail,
Her heart was tint, her peace was stown.
The Spanish maid, and cheers the Spanish swain.
Through pastures not his own, the master took;
His life an infancy, and sings his fill;
Farewell, thou fair day, thou green earth, and ye skies,
With careless robe, to meet the morning ray,
E'en then my soul with exultation dances
And down some swart abysm he had gone,
On infant Washington? Has Earth no more
The nether sides of mossy stones and rock,--
For little birds--then toil hath time for play,
Went forth, pure in his heart, against the taint
But hand your nine-tail cat a wee,
Which only make more mourned and more endeared
Of those dusk places in times far aloof
Wrapping all objects from my smothered sight,
Still she undaunted reels and rattles on,
And join the mimic train of merry Carnival.
Ye godly Councils wha hae blest this town;
Dick and Dob, with jostling joll,
And then she hover'd over me, and stole
Plashes with easy wave its flaggy sides,
Whose airy texture, from a golden string,
Through bowers of fragrant and enwreathed light,
The winds, lamenting thro' their caves,
And still he thinks it blasphemy as well
While Phoebus sank beyond Benledi;
From his lush clover covert;--when anew
And with two thousand years of ivy grown,
They loiter, lounging, lank, an' lazy;
He lived to chase the hounds another day.
"Look not alone on youthful prime,
To comfort poor old Susan Gale.
I dread ye'll learn the gate again;
Forbye, he'll shape you aff, fu' gleg,
Full brimm'd, and opposite sent forth a look
Till the host for high treason came down a full quart.
With many recognitions dim and faint,
Where'er he be, the L--d be near him!
And came to this conclusion, O:
The brilliant, fair, and soft,--the glories of old days,
Or haunted Garpal  draws his feeble source,
Mak haste an' turn King David owre,
From friendship and dearest affection remov'd;
In the still cave and forest; o'er the flower
An orphan's curse would drag to Hell
And sweetly gilds the edge of Eve,
Wha's ragin' flame, an' scorchin' heat,
Save where Tritonia's  airy shrine adorns
O be propitious, nor severely deem
Ere toil his thirst for travel can assuage,
So may such foes deserve the most remorseless deed!
Where pleasure may be sent: the nested wren
Unnoticed like a very stranger.
And what if my poor cheek be brown?
Shall be more tempered, and thy hope far higher!
Who formed this frame with beneficent aim,
Thou art the life o' public haunts;
And many a moving tale in antique rhymes
When sad distress reduced the children's meal:
Now comes the sax an' twentieth simmer,
To the small whisper of the as paltry few--
To wail her braw John Highlandman.
A sun-beamy tale of a wreath, and a chain;
While day and night can bring delight,
When winds rave thro' the naked tree;
How drink gaed round, in cogs an' caups,
O' hunting the wicked lieutenant;
There's the daisy all the year, bonny lassie O!
Of sportive wood run wild; these pastoral farms
Yet deign, white Queen of Beauty, thy fair eyes
Except for breakin' o' their timmer,
A few sad tears does Betty shed.
In marble-paved pavilion, where a spring
The view o't gies them little fright.
From the first hour of Empire in the bud
No murders or rapes worth the naming.
"I saw thee seek the sounding shore,
Might I indulge at large in all my store
Here awa, there awa, wandering Willie,
The fien'-ma-care, quo' the feirrie auld wife,
In vain thy Kate awaits thy comin'!
The devil-haet, that I sud ban,
We had ne'er been broken hearted.
Save what from heaven is with the breezes blown
His shade from Hades upon that dread day
Cupid well-natured, my Adonis kind;
Be spiritualiz'd. Peona, we shall range
At length they turn to nothing else but down,
May mourn their loss wi' doofu' clamour;
In a' their charms, and conquering arms,
Stands in the centre, eager to invade
And bore its fragrant sweets alang:
Wha sees Kerroughtree's open yett,
Proves him a churchman orthodox and sound.
Along the greensward uniformly pricks
And He whom ruthless fates expel
Her robes light waving in the breeze
Flutt'ring an' gasping in her gore:
Sure Thou, Almighty, canst not act
Cut to his heart again with the keen knife
Thro' your heart's like a child,
Love-gifts of carnival signoras.
The squatted hare while in half sleeping fit;
Our bardie, tamely, keeps the spence
What premiers--what? even monarchs' mighty gaugers:
Or what a thing is love! 'Tis She, but lo!
But who was she, the Lady of the dead,
Chief isle of the embowered Cyclades,
Yet fat she is, the merriest in the place,
At last, by hap, through some young trees it struck,
Had dipt his rod in it: such garland wealth
The widening circles into nothing gone.
After the Argonauts, in blind amaze
Swarm twittering round them in the dark;
Thou shalt see the field-mouse peep
And who would to Liberty e'er prove disloyal,
Thee, Caledonia, thy wild heaths among,
Until it seem'd a horrid presence there,
Dark-heaving--boundless, endless, and sublime--
Or the sweet name of love had pass'd away.
The evening sun was ne'er sae sweet,
Ev'n wi' a tinkler-gypsey's messin'.
In sullen billows, murmuring and vast,
Then thinks upon the fire and hurries back;
I'm no design'd to try its mettle;
It chanc'd the stack he faddom't thrice,
An offering to thine altar from the Queen
Nor was it long ere he had told the tale
And bid old Saturn take his throne again."--
Haymakers, hustling from the rain to hide,
Where proud Sevilla triumphs unsubdued:
An' my auld toothless Bawtie's dead;
Trust to my feelings, and write you a letter.
He wad na wrang'd the vera deil,
And drop in [their] perplexity.
For here, not one, but many, make their play,
Have followed, for such loss, I would believe,
Yet they contriv'd to steal the Basil-pot,
Are they not bridled?--Venice, lost and won,
Now laugh and be gay, to the woods away!
She who was named Eternal, and arrayed
And led him up, thro' Stirling town;
I'll conjure the ghost of the great Rorie More,
Mine host's sign-board flew away,
And eke the same to honest Lucky,
To you I fly, ye with my soul accord.
And suck out his blood with a reed or a straw
Oh, this world is but a rude world, and hurts a thing so fair;
The infant ice scarce bent beneath their feet:
Would let me feel their scales of gold and green,
In light, in gloom, in star or blazing sun,
Glaciers of bleak Mont Blanc both far and near--
An' there will be Wigton's new sheriff,
How oft on Sundays, when I'd time to tramp,
Sighing all day--and still she kiss'd, and wept.
As the wretch looks o'er Siberia's shore,
My auld gray head had lien in clay,
His left sat smiling Beauty's paragon.
Now, where the quick Rhone thus hath cleft his way,
A time, when rough, rude man had haughty ways;
Will be its high remembrancers: who they?
Went arching up, and like two magic ploughs
O, if thou hadst breathed then,
Came, and who were her subtle servitors.
When these enchanted portals open wide,
When for this scene of peace and love
I red you, honest man, tak tent!
To find it reaches scarce above the ground.
Ye glaiket, gleesome, dainty damies,
A Father's love and Mortal's agony
O were some villains hangit high.
Een here my simple feelings nurse
Her lips with music for the welcoming.
Should e'er unhappy love my bosom pain,
And now my conclusion I'll tell,
Then let us drink the Stewartry,
And broken the heart o' the barley Miller.
What tho' their Phoebus kinder warms,
Full on the coast of Suli's shaggy shore,
The sage grave ancient cough'd, and bade me say,
A slur for boys, just crizzled and that's all.
Be thou my nurse; and let me understand
Mourn, spring, thou darling of the year!
Thy bosom blushing still with dew!
Will set a green robe floating round her head,
In purple was she robed,  and of her feast
Pour'd forth his blood beneath the assassin's knife,
And by thine eyes, and by thy starry crown!"
Though shent with Egypt's plague, unkempt, unwashed, unhurt.
The corse is piled--sweet sight for vulgar eyes--
Gave utterance as he entered: "Ha!" I said,
My friends, I did not follow you!
"When from this wreathed tomb shall I awake!
To make three guineas do the work of five:
Ne'er thinkin' they wad fash me for't;
Death rides upon the sulphury Siroc,
Of grass, a wailful gnat, a bee bustling
This night I'm free to tak my aith,
Some usefu' plan or beuk could make,
And to the calm of heart, in calmness shows
O thou, wha in the heavens dost dwell,
Dim o'er the bird of darkness' native site,
Yea, or my veined pebble-floor, that draws
The Hermit stepp'd forth from the boat,
From him that wears the star and garter,
With noiseless speed as swift as summer light
Like groves, and rocks, and mottled fountains.
Her loveliness invisible, yet free
No churchman am I for to rail and to write,
And as she spake, into her face there came
And dashest him again to Earth:--there let him lay.
This said, poor Mailie turn'd her head,
To change like this, a mind so far imbued
Where I can pillow on the yielding rush;
But many days have past since last my heart
When dancing thoughtless pleasure's maze,
I wad turn my back on you and it a',
And piled until the sky for shame
The stone-chat, or the glancing sand-piper;
We cannot dream what oer our heads may hing;
When deemed he no strange ear was listening:
Oh, who could wish a sweeter home, or better place to find?
But when the happy vintage touch'd their brains,
O leave the palm to wither by itself;
For all those visions were o'ergone, and past,
Ye fright the nightly wand'rer's way
Thick, as to curtain up some wood-nymph's home.
As that which laid th' accomplish'd Burnet low.
Full soothingly to every nested finch:
Their tinsel show, and a' that;
But nothing then was scarcely talked about,
Smith, wi' his sympathetic feeling,
A moment pauseth ere he lifts the rod;
To serve their king and country weel,
Rippled delighted up the flowery side;
She darts as with a torrent's force,
The sheep within the fallow field,
And see how dark the backward stream!
In pity from the search forbear:
She brooded o'er the luxury alone:
Subdued majesty with this glad time.
From the green sea up to my hidden source
He was a woodman, and could fell and saw
Beneath thy morning star advance,
His well-won bays, than life itself more dear,
And with him all the joys are fled
For there he is wand'ring, and musing on me,
"O ye, whom wrath consumes! who, passion-stung,
Still brooding o'er the cadence of his lyre;
Some silent laws our hearts may make,
An' Lord, remember singing Sannock,
Write on my tablets all that was permitted,
O'er Philomela's pity-pleading strains.
Great spirits now on earth are sojourning;
And on the bay the moon light lay,
Although the sun of poesy is set,
Full alchemiz'd, and free of space. Behold
Upon the bourne of bliss, but misery?"
Thoughtless at first, but ere eve's star appeared
Thy fairy dwelling is as lone as Thou!
Then Sir, your hand--my friend and brother.
Than a mere Alexander, and, unstained
O! may't ne'er be a livin' plague
Oh! many a time and oft, had Harold loved,
When all above was faint with mid-day heat.
My dearest meed, a friend's esteem and praise:
And, as he pass'd, each lifted up its head,
The maple with its tassel flowers of green,
Then, to the heath bell's silken hood they fly,
Forgiveness: yet he turn'd once more to look
Save wings, for heaven:--Porphyro grew faint:
And wonders when he climbs the highest tree
The lav'rock shuns the palace gay,
Mantles the earth with darkness, until right
"Nor less I deem that there are powers,
For yet the past doth prison me. The rill,
Or nature aught of pleasure give,
And now across this moor my steps I bend--
Things that have made me watchful; the far roll
He has cooper'd and ca'd a wrong pin in't,
He sang wi' joy the former day,
There was a noise of wings, till in short space
Pimps, sharpers, bawds, and opera girls;
Hae turn'd sax rood beside our han'
Suck, little babe, oh suck again!
And soon the village to the pasture flew,
Like callow eagles at the first sunrise.
The last year he'd a neighbour's face,
With long-forgotten story, and wherein
Lead to the wretched, vile, and base.
And would have graced them well;
My soul, delightless, a' surveys,
A virtuous populace may rise the while,
The many heard, and the loud revelry
One's senses with so dense a breathing stuff
Some auld us'd hands had taen a note,
The dame brings forth in complimental mood,
But Harold on such arts no more relied;
Ye bonnie lasses, dight your e'en,
Among the conchs and shells of the lofty grot,
The strength of better thoughts, and seek their prey
Some idly trailed their sheep-hooks on the ground,
Healest thy wandering and distempered child:
Peeps blushing on the Revel's laughing crew,
To mak it shorter by the hood."
Your impudence protects you sairly:
The winds and waters are in his command,
To milk as usual in our close beyond,
I AM: yet what I am none cares or knows,
To realms unknown while fate exiles me,
We've bought and sold for English gold--
Wi' arm repos'd on the chair back,
O how your wild horrors a lover alarms!
Shine bonnily and bean fields blossom ripe,
'Twas far too strange, and wonderful for sadness;
Th' outstretching lake, embosom'd 'mong the hills,
Too partial friend! fain would I follow thee
And sips its freshness from the little rills;
Whilst they did sleep in love's elysium.
That danc'd awa wi' the Exciseman.
Twa laughin' een o' bonnie blue.
Its most ambiguous atoms with sure art;
Lassie wi' the lint-white locks,
The garland-forest, which the gray walls wear,
Syne tun'd his pipes wi' grave grimace.
Within your dear mansion may wayward contention
"The passing moment's all we rest on!"
But Tam kenn'd what was what fu' brawlie,
With all her limbs on tremble, and her eyes
Gin ye'll leave your Collier Laddie.
Hae, there's a rip to thy auld baggie:
Shook with a thunder of applause,
And still and mute, in wonder lost,
And now all in mine own Countrée
To utter secrets, haply I might say
To nurse the golden age 'mong shepherd clans:
Thou mock-truce to the troubled mind,
And lo! the bard, a great reward,
From a sick dove. At length, to break the pause,
Into the widest alley they all past,
But beauty how frail and how fleeting,
Parted its dripping leaves with eager care.
More sorrow like to this, and such like woe,
Parent, filial, kindred ties?--
While to the town she posts away;
In this little dome, all those melodies strange,
My thoughts! shall I unveil them? Listen then!
Long time ere soft caressing sobs began
When ebbing life nae mair shall flow,
Death to a human eye: for there did spring
And tittering, tottering sideways he neer got straight again,
Gain'd its bright portal, enter'd, and behold!
Came on them, like a smoke from Hinnom's vale;
Their neighbour's name was peace, with her they went,
Who know them best despise them most.
The meanest hind in fair Scotland
Some urge, the morning cock to shun,
And at the fruits thereof what shapes they be,
But from these crazing thoughts my brain, escape!
Restless and worn, and stern and wearisome,
By infant hands, left on the path to die.
It is the last of all my flock."
Or blind Orion hungry for the morn.
Nor even two different shades of the same,
Shall make us baith sae blythe an' witty,
That you may keep th' unerring line,
In sullen vengeance, I, disdain'd reply:
And why on horseback have you set
Like loss o' health, or want o' masters,
Snugly retired in yet dew-laden bowers,
Companion'd or alone; while many a light
Will ye gang down the water-side,
Poor Cynthia greeted him, and sooth'd her light
But hath decreed that wicked men
And have they there a night and day,
The cudgel in my nieve did shake.
Have strewed a scene, which I should see
By whim inspired, or haply prest wi' care,
May He who gives the rain to pour,
In youthfu' bloom, love sparkling in her e'e,
Perhaps when you are at the place
O rare! to see thee fizz an' freath
Upon his elbow rais'd, all prostrate else,
Spreading her perfect arms upon the air,
Such a parcel of rogues in a nation.
And lifted hands, and trembling lips he stood;
When Fortune fled her spoiled and favourite child,
All the immortal fairness of his limbs;
In the prison a thrall sees nought but the sky.
The furrow'd waving corn is seen
His fate most goddess-like. Help me, I pray,
'Tis he fulfils great Nature's plan,
"Life's cares they are comforts," --a maxim laid down
Nature's sweet voices always full of love
In striving from its crystal face to take
From the sequester'd haunts of gay Titania,
(The patriot's God, peculiarly Thou art,
Or a life-time so long as he'd credit for beer.
Wi' heaving breast and bare neck,
And poisoned was my spirit: despair sung
She winna come hame to her Willy.
Who can appease like her a lover's ghost?
Fit speculation--such as in strange land
Their youth away, and die? 'Twas even so:
But little dreaming, as the wakening wind
Small power the nipped affections have to grow,
An' ay the night comes round again,
The blessings of Tighe had melodiously given;
Of Poesy. Ill-fated, impious race!
She's coming from among the trees,
Apollo chang'd thee; how thou next didst seem
Delicate, put to proof the lythe Caducean charm.
To burst with hoarsest thunderings, and wipe
For monie a pursie she had hooked,
I knelt with pain--reached out my hand--had grasp'd
By Juno's smile I turn not--no, no, no--
The little cottage stood alone, the pride
And my frame perish even in conquering pain;
In Tempe or the dales of Arcady?
A fit and unwalled temple, there to seek
Glows red and finds thee singing at the plough.
Broken and trembling to the yoke she bore,
Looks out upon the winds with glorious fear:
There, in thy scanty mantle clad,
All is concentered in a life intense,
'Tis the last remnant of the wreck of years,
Till some bit callan bring me news
The monstrous sea is thine--the myriad sea!
Till sleep creeps nigh to ease their cares,
The which, in disentangling for their fire,
Who knew his Votary often lost and caught,
If Greece one true-born patriot still can boast:
An' mourn, ye whirring paitrick brood!--
In vain assail him with their prayer;
His troubles grew upon him day by day,
And look, quite dead to every worldly thing!
(The Woman thus her artless story told)
Who stolen hast away the wings wherewith
Alcides with the distaff now he seemed
She knits or sews, and talks the while
And heaths were in a richer order.
Cannot I form? Cannot I fashion forth
Will put choice honey for a favoured youth:
And now comes in my happy hours,
Now spring has clad the grove in green,
Did yet inspire a cheer, which he forbore to check.
Once more upon the waters! yet once more!
The brook purls simmering its declining tide
Take all the world away--and leave me still
Towards it by a sandy path, and lo!
Ill suits the passions which belong to Youth;
The tither was a ploughman's collie,
Dashed against the ladder's side.
For shelter when heaven's thunder voice was near;
Itself expired, but leaving them an age
Now on the moth-time of that evening dim
And every man I chanc'd to see,
Till others fall where other chieftains lead
Of cold Sublimity, where forms and falls
Hover'd and buzz'd his wings, with fearful roar,
Who has no will but by her high permission;
Athos--Olympus--Ætna.--Atlas--made
To do some errands, and convoy her hame.
Keeping in wait whole days for Neptune's voice,
Benighted, close they huddled from the cold,
For she was prophesying of her glory;
What treasure lay so locked, so hid?--A woman's grave.
That oer the pale-tops smiled on passers-by,
And now to the sea-coast, with numbers more, we drew.
I'll sell my park and sell my hall
For so you've sworn, Lord Gregory,
An' could hae flown out-owre a stank,
That but a moment's thought is passion's passing bell.
All you who follow wealth and power,
You don't forget old friends no more than we
Lay sorrowing; when every tear was born
Could I to thee be ever more than friend:
Or ruffles all the surface of the lake
His eyes to fever out, his voice to cease.
But, heavens! how he fell a swearin', a swearin',
Wha kens before his life may end,
Who worship, here are altars for their beads--
With dangerous speed: and so he did not mourn
O, hand your tongue, my feirrie auld wife,
But here, alas! for me nae mair
Still cracks his whip, bawls every horse's name,
The Dome of Thought, the Palace of the Soul:
Return'd the snake, "but seal with oaths, fair God!"
About its mother's heart, and brought
They get the jovial, ranting kirns,
O why should Fate sic pleasure have,
When Phoebus gies a short-liv'd glow'r
The sails at noon left off their tune
What stamps the wrinkle deeper on the brow?
Longing to wipe each tear, to heal each groan,
Had there not been some recompense
How your dread howling a lover alarms!
In one fond breast, to which his own would melt,
Grew hush; the stately music no more breathes;
Or thieves by dozing watch-dogs creep,
There darts strange light of varied hues and dyes:
"O thou, for whose soul-soothing quiet, turtles
The covert of old trees, with trunks all hoar,
Blow winds high or low, she might rest her at will.
Know'st thou that man?" Poor Lamia answer'd not.
When the pattering rain drives by
The other's fierceness. Through the air they flew,
With legs stretched out as though he could not rise.
Wi' usquabae we'll face the devil!
And pass in peace along the magic waste;
And fish were dimpling, as if good nor ill
Years will lay them with the dead--
To the young listeners gaping round--
My Muse maun be thy bonnie sel':
Sprouting its spiry points of tender green,
Of element, earth, water, air, and fire,--
A few days more--a few years must--
Can't be got without hard money!
The sculptur'd dead, on each side, seem to freeze,
The slender bit beauty you grasp in your arms:
Of the o'ermastered Victor stops--the reins
Roll on, thou deep and dark blue Ocean--roll!
And should I ever see them, I will tell you
When thou behold'st them drooping nigh,
Disparts a dew-lipp'd rose. Above his head,
Tracing along, it brought me to a cave,
To make these felt and feeling, well may be
So elegantly o'er the waters' brim
A bunch of violets full blown, and double,
Whereon to gaze the eye with joyaunce fills,
Ca' them whare the burnie rowes--
Into my bosom, that the dreadful might
She yields to one her person and her heart,
Then chance an' fortune are sae guided,
Yet spurn'd at fortune's door, man,
Here men of every clime appear to make resort.
Of me and of my Soul, as I of them?
But passing neighbours often marked them smile,
He saw far in the concave green of the sea
"All hail! My own inspired bard!
And bring a brood of chelping chickens home.
The mountain-village where his latter days
In port Cenchreas, from Egina isle
With those beauties, scarce discrn'd,
When a' their days are done, man;
Till the fields where he lived should be known in my song.
That hour, o' night's black arch the key-stane,
Into the outer courts of Neptune's state:
But pleasure they hae nane for me,
Methinks 'twould be a guilt--a very guilt--
A' this and mair I never heard of;
On self-condemning bosoms, it were here,
Now ev'ry sour-mou'd girnin' blellum,
And Squire and Lord were purchased with a groat.
Yet if, as holiest men have deemed, there be
With breath all incense, and with cheek all bloom--
The spot they call'd it Linkum-doddie.
Or Job's pathetic plaint, and wailing cry;
Or from your swelling downs, where sweet air stirs
And then the bluecap tootles in its glee,
Lang may she stand to prop the land,
To the last halo of the Chiefs and Sages
The deadly foes to many a blossomed sprout
For Greece and England. While astonishment
Through verdurous glooms and winding mossy ways.
Or wha will tent the waifs and crocks,
Will your poor, narrow foot-path of a street,
So I with leisure on three sides a sheet
Of gold, and lines of Naiads' long bright tress.
Of painful blindness; leaving thee forlorn,
Time! the Corrector where our judgments err,
Pausing, annoyed,--we know not what we see,
Language of pity and the force of wrong.
"Write! thou wilt never have a better day."
And dazzling ribbons they delight to show,
Were pent in regions of laborious breath;
Perplex'd, the while melodiously he said:
Here farmers gash, in ridin' graith
Of pride and avarice,--the dark pine roof
He had left thinking of the mystery,--
What says she, my dearie, my Eppie M'Nab?
In ruin--even as he had seen the desolate sight;
Two fan-like fountains,--thine illuminings
So ne'er a fellow-creature slight
And sing to it one latest lullaby;
And one low piping sound more sweet than all--
Through the country lighter rove?
Your hand's owre light on them, I fear;
Twin'd am'rous round the raptured scene;
With all the gardener Fancy e'er could feign,
And the world before me to win my bread,
My savage journey, curious I pursue,
"And I will join a mother's tender cares,
Of all the numerous ills that hurt our peace,
Here, son of Saturn! was thy favourite throne:
To scare a second robber from his prey?
I'll nail the self-conceited sot,
Aught that recalls the daily drug which turned
And good instructor; but to-night he seems
Blue, silver-white, and budded Tyrian,
When I have told thee how my waking sight
Though the dull brain perplexes and retards:
Alone about the dark--Forgive me, sweet:
Downright and orthodox that all the land
A rhyming, ranting, raving billie,
If there's a hole in a' your coats,
A virgin light to the deep; my grotto-sands
But little needing, and but little gained.
I guess by the dear angel smile,
Above, strange groups adorned the corridore;
Far dearer to me are yon humble broom bowers,
No, no, that shall not be: thee will I bless,
Ye'll see how New-Light herds will whistle
When Januar' wind was blawing cauld,
For your braw, nameless, dateless letter,
The rev'rend gray-beards rav'd and storm'd
That what is no sense must be nonsense.
An' shall his fame an' honour bleed
Urging its kind to utter "pink" again,
A thief, new-cutted frae a rape,
These little window dwellers, in cottages and halls, were always
Think, my deliverer, how desolate
Oft on my hand her magic coin's been struck,
Ironic satire, sidelins sklented
Lock'd up like veins of metal, crampt and screw'd;
The sleepy bit lassie, she dreaded nae ill;
On blosmy twig still swinging from the breeze,
Last noon beheld them full of lusty life;--
Fools may tell ye lies in spite,
While he, all-conquering, play'd his part
Now welcome the simmer, and welcome my Willie,
Which nips Life's tree, and dooms Man's worst--his second fall.
A thing unteachable in world's skill,
Their points of contact, and swift counterchange;
And lie down wi' my Collier Laddie.
I see the spreading leaves and flowers,
Look where the second Cæsar's trophies rose!
As the wind suthers through each tiny spear,
Another still! and still another!
Of poesy, that it should be a friend
But clear your decks, and here's the sex!
In ruddy pomp and ever thronging mood
It may escape the learned clerks;
I'm sure 'twas as lucky for them.
The Grave shall bear the chiefest prize away,
And, therefore, was just going; when, behold!
Ev'n ev'ry ray of hope destroy'd,
Of summer-birds sing welcome as ye pass;
He had not with his tamed leopards play'd;
"Ma'am, let me tell you," quoth my man of rhymes,
And sit, and rhyme and think on Chatterton;
And sage experience bids me this declare--
Ha! whare ye gaun, ye crowlin ferlie!
Dim seen, through rising mists and ceaseless show'rs,
Books! 'tis a dull and endless strife,
He tauld mysel' by word o' mouth,
He felt, or deemed he felt, no common glow:
And echo still as ready bawls the same:
Good duffle grey, and flannel fine;
She was eight years old, she said;
Happier, and dearer to society.
Of power, and their own weakness hide,
When winter comes in earnest to fulfil
Can I forget the hallow'd grove,
Here Poesy might wake her heav'n-taught lyre,
And barley-scone shall cheer me.
Good Betty! put him down again;
I saw thee sitting, on a throne of gold,
And, I guess, called "Come in and sit down."
Or, faith! I fear, that, wi' the geese,
Sunset divides the sky with her--a sea
To Mary-queen the praise be yeven
Who feel by reason and who give by rule,
Smooth-moving came Oceanus the old,
Dear Nature is the kindest mother still!
Ilk spring they're new deckit wi' bonnie white yowes.
There stood a knight, patting the flowing hair
A circle round the village and soon, tired,
The devil got notice that Grose was a-dying,
Mark ruffian Violence, distain'd with crimes,
I wish you luck o' the prize, man!"
The rantin' dog, the daddie o't.
The planet orb of fire, whereon he rode
Full of sweet desolation--balmy pain.
Absorbed as in some vagrant summer dream;
(L--d pardon a' my sins an' that too!)
The visions all are fled--the car is fled
Does haughty Gaul invasion threat,
The birds around me hopp'd and play'd:
The sun those mornings used to find,
Odorous and enlivening; making all
Whose Fate to distant homes confined their lot,
Which tenfold force gives nature's law,
For there wi' my lassie, the day lang I rove,
Ilk smack still, did crack still,
Or by a cyder-press, with patient look,
Open wide the mind's cage-door,
From wicked men like thee. Go, go!--I deem
May teach the lyre to languish;
For there they'll think you clever;
Dissolve the frozen purity of air;
And trace the dwindled edgings of its brim;
Though not to one dome circumscribeth She
Is still impregnate with divinity,
And then for cold not sleep a wink.
But soon there breath'd a wind on me,
And hailed the last resort of fruitless love,
While cheerful peace, with linnet song,
When last the wintry gusts gave over strife
With fast thick warble his delicious notes,
An' aits set up their awnie horn,
Eve's bonny squad, priests wyte them sheerly
Away at once the deadly yellow spleen.
Tall oaks, branch-charmed by the earnest stars,
Frae this time forth, I do declare
To breathe away as 'twere all scummy slime
A bailiff he, and who so great to brag
For somewhere in that sacred island dwelt
All that's reveal'd from that far seat of blisses,
'Twas a hard change, an evil time was come;
But far off fowls hae feathers fair,
And soothe the Virtues weeping on this bier:
And ebbs but to reflow!--Renew thy rainbow, God!
Time after time, to quiet her. Their crimes
The jovial contest again have renew'd.
So timidly among the stars: come hither!
Of divers brilliances? 'tis the edifice
Lovely wee thing, wert thou mine,
Yes, pour, ye warblers, pour the notes of woe!
I hy'd me home, and tun'd my pipe
Fair creatures! whose young childrens' children bred
That spreads so clear o'er our solemnity."
'Till some evening, sober, calm,
Or Vesper, amorous glow-worm of the sky;
That weighed upon her gentle dust: a cloud
Cypress and ivy, weed and wallflower grown
Then clubs an' hearts were Charlie's cartes,
Thy locks in knightly casque are rested:
Couldst thou wish for lineage higher
Their hapless race wild-wand'ring roam,
And Archimago leaning o'er his book:
The stiffest o' them a' he bow'd;
Come, firm Resolve, take then the van,
Thro' the holes of his eyes and the hole of his mouth
With others of the sisterhood. Hard by,
Not a senseless, tranced thing,
They were enthroned, in the even tide,
Concealing the course of the dark winding rill;
As on the hanks of Ayr I stray'd,
In times long past; to sit with them, and talk
He stops--he starts--disdaining to decline:
﻿    Not in those climes where I have late been straying,
Some untied bonnet on its dancing wings;
Here History paints, with elegance and force,
Who glorify thy consecrated pages;
But now the Lord's ain trumpet touts,
Shall find in the unhonoured grave,
And thousands hasten'd to the charge,
Is anguish unmingled, and agony pure.
Twas born upon an angel's breast.
The helpless warriors of a willing doom,
On earth I am a stranger grown;
But who so stares on him? His sister sure!
Or dreamed he loved, since Rapture is a dream;
Ah! that to these were given such peaceful shades
Sweetly, sweetly blew the breeze--
On spindles made of spiders' thread.
And list! the brustling noise, that oft deceives,
Whene'er I forgather wi' sorrow end care,
To share it a', to share it a'.
Oer which a little arch is thrown:
There's ne'er a flower that blooms in May
When frosts lay lang, an' snaws were deep,
An' also the wild Scot of Galloway,
"That grave ye've heard of, where the four roads meet,
Another, hideous sight! unseamed appears,
Singing alone, and fearfully,--how the blood
The frugal wifie, garrulous, will tell,
For their fame it shall last while the world goes round.
Wi' merry sangs, and friendly cracks,
'Twas neither broken wing nor limb,
That fill'd, wi' hoast-provoking smeek,
And hunted as was William Wallace,
And of that other ridge whose barren back
That I am here afore thy sight,
And screw your temper pins aboon
Did many talents gild thy span?
So, e'en to preserve the poor body in life,
The thundering guns are heard on ev'ry side,
Ever pursued, the other strove to shun--
Who never quits the breast--no meaner passion shares.
First covered o'er, and taught this aged tree,
She touch'd her fair large forehead to the ground,
It would not pay for candle-light.
But to me it's delightless--my Nannie's awa!
And, save when Bacchus kept his ivy tent,
A guide, a buckler, an example,
Of wealthy lustre was the banquet-room,
And fiercely by the arm he took her,
When Cynthia lights wi' silver ray,
Said nothing like his works was ever printed;
And heard a bird with merry joys
When Politics came there, to mix
To feel the air that plays about the hills,
Thou haply mayst delight in, will I fill
For Time hath not rebuilt them, but upreared
O Tartarus! but some few days agone
With that new blissful golden melody.
Wi' glorious light was glintin';
It rais'd my hair, it fann'd my cheek,
So that the jewel, safely casketed,
An' when the auld moon's gaun to lea'e them,
But glory is the sodger's prize,
Along the margin-sand large foot-marks went,
Spoilt all her silver mail, and golden brede;
I doubt na, Sir, but then we'll find,
And there she lulled me asleep,
It is not that yon hoary lengthening beard
The green leaves over all by Time o'erthrown;--
And then they loose them all and set them on.
Would surely be a tedious tale.
Ah! surely it must be whene'er I find
To stay content wi' yowes at hame
But to see her, was to love her;
And by felt death was nearly nicket;
His dream away? What melodies are these?
To where two roads a hollow cross;
The rantin' dog, the daddie o't.
New shores descried make every bosom gay;
Her flowing locks, the raven's wing,
Than ever hae acted sae faithless to him.
(Awhile forbear, ye tort'ring fiends;)
And thus in the face of life's sun-and-shower weather
For Summer has o'er-brimm'd their clammy cells.
It cannot be--Adieu!" So said, she rose
Just so may love, although 'tis understood
A gloomy wanness spoiled her rosy cheek,
The langer ye hae them--the mair they're carest.
Ere the God of Torment taught her
Slow-stepp'd, and robed in philosophic gown:
Dizzy my brain, with interruption short
But till that comes, I'll bless the rules
My kindest, best respects I sen' it,
Mine was th' insensate frenzied part,
What smoothest air thy smoother forehead woos?
And they had fix'd the wedding-day,
The Ship was cheer'd, the Harbour clear'd--
"Arms and the Man," whose re-ascending star
Twas then a blast o' Janwar win'
And then he flew away ere his feathers they were dry.
And the thyme it is wither'd, and rue is in prime."
Tumultuous tides his pulses roll,
Thou wast my clarion's blast--thou wast my steed--
That things of delicate and tenderest worth
It's just sic poet, an' sic patron.
Tho' in his heart he weel believes,
The while they feel thine airy fellowship.
No matter for that, said the toper, and grinned;
And waft my dear laddie ance mair to my arms.
Seeing all their luckless race are dead, save me,
And at the word right gladly he
They might have used it better, but, allured
In every vale for their delight was stowed:
It seem'd to whirl around me, and a swoon
So the two brothers and their murder'd man
"For fools will prate o' right and wrang,
To all but heaven's hailing dew.
Who, that thou canst not be for ever here,
That vile, wanchancie thing--a rape!
Thy tens o' thousands thou hast slain!
The hollow caves return a sullen moan.
A Towmont, Sirs, is gane to wreck!
For the devil the prey will despise.
"Tis all the same with Harry Gill;
But the pursy old landlord just waddled up stairs,
The husband of a year! the father of the dead!
In all the pomp of ignorant conceit;
Between her kissing breasts, and every charm
And Music meets not always now the ear:
Fu' blythe he whistled at the gaud,
And is this all the world has gained by thee,
Yet never colour left his cheek,
Echoing grottos, full of tumbling waves
Some Auld Light herds in neibor towns
A crowd of shepherds with as sunburnt looks
Or crushing tween their father's knees,
And makes her drag him homeward all the way.
To cradle thee my sweet, and lull thee: yes,
But tell me whiskey's name in Greek,
But let a portion of ethereal dew
May I never see it, may I never trow it,
He turn'd him right, and round about
I cannot know what country owns thee now,
That they can meet no more, though broken-hearted:
No more of rest, but now thy dying bed!
When lightnings fire the stormy lift,
Each having a white wicker over brimm'd
Who has another care when thou hast smil'd?
Glide sweet in monie a tunefu' line!
The happy hour may soon be near
And where ye justly can commend, commend them;
A Spirit's feeling, and where he hath leant
And that loved one, alas! could ne'er be his.
Her pony, that is mild and good,
"A last leave of my son, a mariner,
Until he's called to claim it in the skies.
For then he was inspired,  and from him came,
A little space, with boughs all woven round;
O'er steps of broken thrones and temples--Ye!
While waters wimple to the sea;
"In his flesh there's a famine,"
Which shows that heaven can boil the pot,
Though feathery clouds were floating all along
At passer by, then knaps his hide again;
To turn my admiration, though unpossess'd
With her tail curled round her feet;
When I used to lie and sing by old Eastwell's boiling spring,
The sweeping theatre of hanging woods;
And crabs sun-reddened with a tempting cheek,
On Earth no more, but mingled with the skies?
They glide, like phantoms, into the wide hall;
Red whortle-berries droop above my head,
And all the treasures of the mind--
The pranking bat its nighty circlet makes;
There comes a token like a Scorpion's sting,
In rueful apprehension enter'd O,
'Twas but to kiss my hand, dear George, to you!
The disappointment. Time, that aged nurse,
The gentle look, that rage disarms--
Then let us pray that come it may--
Should he upon an evening ramble fare
Her agéd trees rise thick as once the slain
And when she turned to go, O I'd caught her mantle then,
By fine-turned arms what beauty it conceals;
And my slain spirit, overwrought with fright,
What are you, landlords' rent-rolls? teasing ledgers:
I'll tell you every thing I know;
Along the broad high-way he came,
From jagged trunks, and overshadoweth
Or bright elixir peerless I had drunk,
The zephyr wanton'd round the bean,
While getting whip-sticks from the dangling boughs
And o'er the flowery mead she goes,
Blackening her lovely domes with traces rude.
An' liquor guid to fire his bluid,
Fair the tints of op'ning rose,
To see their sister in her snowy shroud.
Nor did he pass unmoved the gentle scene,
And ivy banks; all leading pleasantly
The feather'd people you might see,
Who breeding flowers, will never breed the same:
Like climbing some great Alp, which still doth rise,
Vitality of poison,--a quick root
May set their Highland bluid a ranklin';
And that was all his travel's story.
When to this country first I came,
Squeez'd from the gorge, and all its uncurl'd length
Almost as pale as moonbeams are,
The next in succession, I'll give you--the King!
Apollo's presence when in act to strike
I flee to his arms I lo'e best,
Each gazer drank; and deeper drank more near:
To balance fair in ilka quarter:
I've sent you here some rhyming ware,
But why urge the tender confession
Till ane Hornbook's ta'en up the trade,
Smelt sweet as gardens wheresoever met;
Resolving to begin that very day
With melancholy thought: O he had swoon'd
Till roof and rafters a' did dirl.--
For I am slow and feeble, and scarce dare
Curst be the hour when from their isle they roved,
Wee Pope, the knurlin, 'till him rives
Her hair was thick with many a curl
She, to her chamber gone, a ditty fair
I'm sure I've seen that bonnie face,
He screw'd the pipes and gart them skirl,
And chews her peaceful cud, bonny Mary O!
The sodger from the wars returns,
It is reflected, clearly, in a lake,
Into the labyrinths of sweet utterance?
"There's nothing that can ease my pain."
Tell them, frae me, wi' chiels be cautious,
Heaven gave me more--it made thee mine!
Laughing, and wailing, groveling, serpenting,
A moment white--then melts for ever;
She plants the forest, pours the flood;
Shall mete its shadow's length.
Within, a palace, and without, a fort:
And rain or snow he never keeps away.
Not at dog's howl, or gloom-bird's hated screech,
At evening the wild woods among?
The dull shell's echo, from a bowery strand
Forgot all violence, and but commun'd
The meanings of all motions, shapes, and sounds;
Which none but secret sisterhood may see,
With quietness and beauty, and so feed
Then fill up a bumper and make it o'erflow.
The roof-tree sinks, but moulders on the hall
Her lips were all my own, and--ah, ripe sheaves
The endless sleep of this new-born Adon',
His poor guide hurried back with agues in her brain.
As do those brighter drops that twinkling stray
She has my heart, she has my hand,
And in the midst, 'mong thousand heraldries,
The first to join and last [to run] away.
Of unseen flowers in heavy peacefulness;
E'en drown'd himself amang the nappy!
They read of politics and not of grain,
Owre fast for thought, owre hot for rule,
Some sairie comfort still at last,
Love was the very root of the fond rage
And pattered on my hat--tis coming nigh!
Though there were nothing save the past, and this,
An' she cried, L--d preserve her!
Her face is fair, her heart is true,
Season of mists and mellow fruitfulness,
I waive the quantum o' the sin,
But long ere night, cut down, it lies
Then came his fit again, which to o'ercome,
A thousand battles have assailed thy banks,
To mourn, but meets no sympathy in sounds.
Some mighty gulph of separation past,
And never will be heard of more.
Awa, thou flaunting god o' day!
That's half sae welcome's thou art.
Unhinges the poor world;--not in that strife,
With heart-felt throes his grateful bosom swells,
With his fierce footsteps, yield in chasms a fearful vent
Keeps head against the freshets. Sick and wan
Your home is nigh at hand, and in the warm pig-stye,
For the late vicar was his heart's delight,
They can but urge a wiser man to smile.
An' ye drink but deep ye'll find him out.
Wherein were cast the heroic and the free,--
The Man of Worth, who has not left his peer,
"So in the church-yard she was laid,
Then the Pirates of Parga that dwell by the waves,
Syne we'll sit down an' tak our whitter,
Nor now preserved the walls he loved to shield before.
O Poesy! for thee I grasp my pen
While Tories fall, while Tories fly,
Aye dropping their hard fruit upon the ground.
Strange modes of merriment the hours consume,
Whose bark drives on and on, and anchored ne'er shall be.
Thus grew it up--"Not in my own sad breast,
The thresher's weary flingin'-tree
Unclasps her warmed jewels one by one;
Or to delight thee with fantastic leaping,
The Queen of Love did never move
And those who know it best, deplore it most;
She talks of sluts, marks each unmended gown,
After long toil and travelling, to miss
Whence came that high perfection of all sweetness?
"From the fiends that plague thee thus--
And not the less when sudden drops of rain
Fair faces and a rush of garments white,
And your life like the new-driven snaw,
So sings the Teian, and he sings in sooth --
Who from true Worship's gold can separate thy dross?
Of summer nights collected still to make
Shouldst weep, and haply weep in vain.
Here, rivers in the sea were lost;
Despoiled yet perfect! with thy circle spreads
But, like himsel' a full free agent.
Lordlings and freres--ill-sorted fry I ween!
Who lives and triumphs in the plough--
Deep in yon cave Honorius long did dwell,
Wi' Smith, wha thro' the heart can glance,
--Scarce give they time in their unruly haste
What wicked looks are those I see?
But if you'd gladly view the spot,
That stud the straggling briars as black as jet,
Behind the wood's old roots, where ivy shields
About these thornless wilds; her pleasant days
And nature still can make amends;
These warrior thousands on the field supine:--
The tender-person'd Lamia melt into a shade.
We heard nought but the roaring linn,
Man knows not--when from out its cradled nook
Whence a' the tones o' mis'ry yell,
A meek and forlorn flower, with naught of pride,
Or friends or kinsfolk on the citied earth,
See these hands, ne'er stretch'd to save,
In freedom's name the little that is mine.
A sunset charm around her, and illume
A Ruin--yet what Ruin! from its mass
Perhaps the Christian volume is the theme,
And, sitting down close by, began to muse
With coloured hoods and richly burnished wings,
And fondly broods with miser care!
By the pangs of lovers slighted;
Is e'en right reft an' clouted,
Remove yon skull from out the scattered heaps:
Far from all human dwelling: what if here
Were never miss'd."--Thus plaining, doth she bring
And fled to the silence of sweet solitude.
To the poor patient oyster, where it sleeps
Ye're like to the timmer o' yon rotten tree,
Which none but craftsmen ever saw!
The third of the same Moon whose former course
Among the abodes of mortals here below,
Sought the grey willows by the pasture-side;
Her sorrows share, and make them less?
It was a vein that never stopp'd,
And fortune favour worth and merit,
To-day I fetched him from the rock;
So Isabella's heart was form'd,
A cheerful honest-hearted clown
Who brooded o'er the water in amaze:
My life from too thin breathing: gone and past
And down the passage cast a glow upon the floor.
And slept there since. Upon the sodden ground
The rock with tears had flow'd.
If I these thoughts may not prevent,
Pigeons and doves: Adonis something mutter'd,
Sac after viewing knives and garters,
Those accents, grateful to thy tongue,
And teaze the grass-hid larks from getting rest.
Surprised me even from a sleepless night;
That climbs the mountain-sides at e'en,
Sooner believe the lies wild chaps will tell
Round and round take up the chorus,
I'd rather stand upon this misty peak,
Sae sweetly move her genty limbs,
Thus they talked of their skill and their labour till noon
Wi' his last gasp his gab did gape;
She dights her grunzie wi' a hushion.
But secret love will break my heart,
Thy giant powers outstript this gaudy age
The dearest comfort o' their lives,
The austerest form of naked majesty--
How pamper'd luxury, flattery by her side,
Yet none could say of wrong he did,
I could write--but Meg maun see't--
And near, the beat of the alarming drum
Ancient; and these three mortal things are still
My madness! let it mantle rosy-warm
Ye banks and braes o' bonnie Doon,
The grass was all shivers, the stars were all bright,
O Moon! the oldest shades 'mong oldest trees
The crew with one consent cried "Bear further out to sea,"
For had ye staid whole weeks awa,
The trees to stumpy dotterels lopt,
Betty a drunken pleasure quaffs,
He had nae wish but--to be glad,
She thought that a tailor could do her nae ill.
Thus looking out did Harry stand;
For when the chiming hounds are out,
By things I trembled at, and gorgon wrath.
I'll meet thee with an undaunted mind.
Rush poles a ladder's help supply.
It seem'd to mak a kind o' stan',
Expanded by the Genius of the spot,
Mars all things with his imitative lisp,
I would nae gie her in her sark,
But we winna mention Redcastle,
Where many a danger I must dare,
Fresh o'er the mountains breaks forth the morning,
A bud their lifetime and a flower their close.
My Peggy's worth, my Peggy's mind,
As on this night, I've met these judges here!
Pardon a muse sae mean as mine,
In search of pleasure throughout every clime:
The shepherd rambling valleys white and wide
A flashing pang! of which the weary breast
And warm thy sons!" Ah, my dear friend and brother,
While nobles strive to please ye,
With tillage or pasture at times she would sport,
Singest of summer in full-throated ease.
And ocean too, with all its solemn noise,
If ye love mothers, never do amiss:
Between her breasts, that never yet felt trouble,
Where the path has lost its way,
My laddie's sae meikle in luve wi' the siller,
Whae'er o' thee shall ill suppose,
Which bore them to Eternity--they saw
When day did daw, and cocks did craw,
This past for certain--undisputed;
Over a bower, where little space he stood;
There's none where boyhood made a swee
Of careless butterflies: amid his pains
But what will ye hae of a fool?
The very knowledge that he lived in vain,
--Thus answered Johnny in his glory,
That waileth every morn and eventide,
Since baffled Triumph droops on Lusitania's coast.
And where warm patches by the hedges run
In sombre chariot; dark foldings thrown
Shall move on soberly, as it is meet;
And, swiftly as a bright Phoebean dart,
Th' Ilissus, Tiber, Thames, an' Seine,
Like Lauwine loosened from the mountain's belt;
And descends to the plain like the stream from the rock.
To something more than nature in the grove)
And these my exhortations! Nor, perchance,
Rose o'er an empire:--but beneath thy right
A deep cold settled aspect nought can shake,
One moment from his home: only the sward
I wondered what the bird could be,
Now not inaptly craved, communing thus,
Join this bright throng, and nimbly follow whither
Of love? Now this is cruel. Since the hour
Alike the Armada's pride or spoils of Trafalgar.
In deeming such inhabit many a spot?
But lordly will, I hold it still
Each hath its pang, but feeble sufferers groan
Nurst in the glowing lap of soft Desire:
Lycius, look back! and be some pity shown."
And robs each floweret of its gem,--and dies;
Butchered to make a Roman holiday--
He was a gash an' faithful tyke,
How lone he was once more, and sadly press'd
Sae may it on your heads return!
And tremble though they love to hear;
Nought interrupts the riot, though in lieu
Andromeda! sweet woman! why delaying
With most prevailing tinsel: who unpen
The meanest station owned him not;
Thro' lofty groves the cushat roves
Kemble, thou cur'st my unbelief
Nor listen to accents, that almost adoring,
These tiny loiterers on the barley's beard,
Lamia, no longer fair, there sat a deadly white.
For all the beauty found in thee,
Ten hundred years: which gone, I then bequeath
Thus only may our sons conceive the scenes we saw!
In face of all his foes, the Cruscan quire,
Of Doris, and the Egean seer, her spouse--
I love thee, youth, more than I can conceive;
'Till, stop! she trotted thro' them a';
Or downward seek the Indian mine;
Sweet birds antheming the morn:
And hops along and heeds with careless eye
While on the window shutters the wind roars,
Where late wi' careless thought I rang'd,
Has tumbled feebler despots from their sway,
Beneath the curdled arms of this stunt oak,
Is timid as the dove's disguise;
Where is the rock of Triumph,  the high place
Awakening without wounding the touched heart,
Around the breathed boar: again I'll poll
And drove at last the spoilers to their shore?
Tho' now ye dow but hoyte and hoble,
Your spleens with so few simple words as these?
There's scarce a soul that's out of bed;
The grace be--"Athole's honest men,
Nor mote my shell awake the weary Nine
Beneath the hallow'd turf where Wallace lies!
There's naething here but Highland pride
An' he is but a fusionless carlie, O!
Scarce daring--from their fearful joys--
Thus the tradition of the gusty deep.
Are now heard whooping up the pasture-hill;
Would up the mountain often climb.
Here's a health to Tammie, the Norland laddie,
He plucks it, dips its stalk in the water: how!
'Tis the far-fam'd, the brave Sir Gondibert,
I talk not of mercy, I talk not of fear;
Of all that's high, and great, and good, and healing.
"Thus for the length of half a day,
Guid observation they will gie them:
And keep me as a chosen food to draw
That each fern-smothered heath and mole-hill waste
Renewed with no kind auspices:--to feel
To look at the new number just laid down,
The Ladies arm-in-arm in clusters,
An' wintle like a saumont-coble,
Their sweet-scented woodlands that skirt the proud palace,
Oh, Rome! my Country! City of the Soul!
I gat your letter, winsome Willie;
Thou'st sheltered hypocrites in many a shower,
While nightly breezes sweep the vines,
Blithe, blithe and merry was she,
Her eye, ev'n turn'd on empty space,
Then must the Pennant-bearer slacken sail,
And deal from iron hands the spare repast;
So saying, she hobbled off with busy fear.
The miserable Despot could not quell
Sustains aloft the battery's iron load;
An' she has twa sparkling roguish een.
I thought myself a handsome youth,
They felt, but heard not, for the solid roar
Who with the weight of years would wish to bend,
But hollow rocks,--and they were palaces
My cheerless suns no pleasure know;
Creep there to conquer and are not afraid.
As little reckt I sorrow's power,
"O that the flutter of this heart had ceas'd,
Wha twists his gruntle wi' a glunch
Here wealth still swells the golden tide,
Her noblest work she classes, O:
As men talk in a dream, so Corinth all,
Right upward, through the bushes, to the sky.
Let lofty firs, and ashes cool,
It's no the driving drift and snaw;
That Angela gives promise she will do
Sits meek Content with light unanxious heart,
I see thee not--I hear thee not--but none
Would he naught see but the dark, silent blue
Rooted in barrenness, where nought below
A fire was once within my brain;
Of coming ripeness, the white city's sheen,
By the wayside to linger, we shall see;
An' think they hear it roarin',
By minist'ring slaves, upon his hands and feet,
A friend mair faithfu' ne'er cam nigh him,
And fair are the maids on the banks o' the Ayr,
And strew'd the lea wi' flowers:
It seems an angry lightning, and doth hiss
And lost in pleasure at her feet he sinks,
Wi' ev'n down want o' wark are curst.
Tis now some two and twenty years,
Not on those summits solely, nor alone
The coward-slave, we pass him by,
Beside her Basil, weeping through her hair.
Ye know the foot-path sidles down the hill,
And the thyme it is wither'd, and rue is in prime.
It seem'd a thrill of pleasure.
There they discours'd upon the fragile bar
And be the Spartan's epitaph on me--
His love-chant, and disburthen his full soul
But thee--thou hell o' a' diseases,
Here it is, my old hearties--Then drink your thirst full,
Then my eye was like to fire, and my heart was like to stone.
Chatter, chatter, chatter still.
There's no a heart that fears a Whig,
The Prophet's tomb of all its pious spoil,
Behold I find it! so exalted too!
On love, and wing'd St. Agnes' saintly care,
The still, sad music of humanity,
Of Heaven again assailed--if Heaven, the while,
Mark how, possess'd, his lashless eyelids stretch
Now Nature hangs her mantle green
With strokes and pats they're welcomed in,
Ah, desperate mortal! I ev'n dar'd to press
Can no one hear? It is a perilous tale!
When chill November's surly blast
The current of my former life was stemm'd,
One cordial in this melancholy vale,
Where Superstition once had made her den
How beautiful thou art! The world how deep!
On me how strangely did he look!
Where fame and honours lofty shine:
Is still--and all upbraideth man.
And every soul it pass'd me by,
Now trodden like the vilest weed:
I could unsay those--no, impossible!
But what will I do wi' Tam Glen?
But the cask that is full, like a giant he lies,
Who is more happy, when, with hearts content,
Would fortune but bring a new comer
And, in the summer tide of blossoming,
Than old dames' cautions, who would wish ye well:
Relieves it from each brushing guest,
But oh! fell death's untimely frost,
I am a friend to love, to loves of yore:
Still is the burthen sung--"O cruelty,
False love and folly I despise.
But gied the auld naig to the Lord.
While victory shines on life's last ebbing sands,
Self-interest saw thee stand in freedom's ways--
Little birds, it gives me pain,
Poor Leezie's heart maist lap the hool!
Love conquers Age--so Hafiz hath averr'd,
With shining tin to keep his dinner warm
Why desert ye your auld native shire?
In the very fane, the light of Poesy:
And bring an angel pen to write
The fallen leaves, when I have sat alone
Back on the heart the weight which it would fling
That wav'd o'er Lugar's winding stream:
Stay'd in their birth, even as here 'tis told.
If in soft slumber thou dost hear my voice,
The reliques of the vernal quire!
The sweetness of the Violet's deep blue eyes,
And they declare Terreagles fair,
See, up he's got the word o' God,
A mortal Sovereign holds her dangerous throne,
Till even comes and dulls their phantasies,
And springing up, they met the wond'ring sight
Let it out on the floor for the dry cock-a-roach--
Wha meekly gie your hurdies to the smiters;
Which, as it were in gentle amity,
And thy sharp lightning in unpractised hands
Wha gets her needs na say he's woo'd,
Then, like a pawing horse let go,
That bids me loathe my present state,
His present being: so he gently drew
And the next flow'rs that deck the spring
Can only charm as in the second place,)
Empty of all misfortune? Do the brooks
Mine dares not call thee from thy sacred Hill:
And roars out, "Weel done, Cutty-sark!"
That future life in worlds unknown
An' trowth my rhymin' ware's nae treasure;
Hope died, and fear itself in agony was lost!
The weary night o' care and grief
Sae I've begun to scrawl, but whether
Amang the heather, in my plaidie,
Drunken from pleasure's nipple; and his love
Blushing into my soul, and let us fly
The air that floated by me seem'd to say
Now life is a burthen that bows me down,
Yourself from his quick eyes?" Lycius replied,
"At thy name though compassion her nature resign,
While circling Time moves round in an eternal sphere.
Who knows how the fashions may alter?
For preaching that three's are an' twa,
And the pale Crescent sparkles in the glen,
Had waned from Olympus' solemn height,
In my repugnant youth,  with pleasure to record
And the horizon stooping smiles
Where youth grows pale, and spectre-thin, and dies;
Or where the Greenock winds his moorland course,
Historian, bard, philosopher, combined;
Whether thro' wimplin' worms thou jink,
I saw their starv'd lips in the gloam
Their native fastnesses not more secure
And where dark yew trees, as we rustle through,
What mad pursuit? What struggle to escape?
And from a basket emptied to the rout
My lord thinks meikle mair upon't.
Her lights, wi' hissing eerie din;
Its murky prison round--then winds wake loud;
Britannia sickens, Cintra! at thy name;
And many a tyrant since; their shores obey
Until sweet Isabella's untouch'd cheek
Ye'll hear a story ye may profit by;
Her long black hair swell'd ampler, in display
But as it is, I live and die unheard,
Sae droops our heart when we maun part
A deep volcanian yellow took the place
Blush keenly, as with some warm kiss surpris'd.
Who grumbling sits, prepared for bed,
That melts the fogs in limpid air,
And I distilling from it thence to run
Above her, on a crag's uneasy shelve,
In March, December, and in July,
The morn that warns th' approaching day,
That very morning, it affects me still,
While o'er the parent clime prowls Murder unrestrained.
Her never-trodden snow, and seen the hoar
In pity of her love, so overcast.
And wonderful, and deep, and hath a sound,
She summon'd every social sprite
When others out of doors are lost in frost and snow.
Wraps his fierce eye--'tis past--he sinks upon the sand!
O'er the dim fragments cast a lunar light,
To his inward senses these words spake aloud;
Of an unnatural heat shot to his heart.
How do they loathe the laughter idly loud,
Streams from his flank the crimson torrent clear:
Most mutable in wishes, but in mind
I seemed transported to another world:--
Doth fear to meet the sea: but sea it met,
The very archings of her eye-lids charm
And he wad do their errands weel,
Shapes from the invisible world, unearthly singing
Has met wi' the queen o' the fair.
Where branched thoughts, new grown with pleasant pain,
For North an' Fox united stocks,
As arts or arms they understand,
Time's touchstone shall destroy,
With beaded bubbles winking at the brim,
All that expands the spirit, yet appals,
Hedge-crickets sing; and now with treble soft
Though mine was all true love without,
And on yon bonnie braes of Ayr;
Or, where the beetling cliff o'erhangs the deep,
A crescent he had carv'd, and round it spent
How pleasant the banks of the clear winding Devon,
Beside the woodride's lonely gate
Dobson leaves his greensward seat,
The rose-bud's the blush o' my charmer,
Looks round him, an' found them
For a' his meal and a' his maut,
The lang lad they ca' Jumpin' John
Then that curst carmagnole, auld Satan,
So canopied, lay an untasted feast
Why, I have been a butterfly, a lord
We almost think they are gold as we pass,
And labour's only cow was drove away.
The happy chance: so happy, I was fain
She has the truest, kindest heart!
Quoth I, "Before I sleep a wink,
Of flesh and bone, curbs, and confines, and frets
Came to his ear, like something from beyond
And through this little gate that claps and bangs
There seems as 'twere a curse upon the Seats
And merchandise' whole genus take their birth:
More hard unkindness, unrelenting,
So sought a Poet, roosted near the skies,
Tis but a trial all must undergo;
The sudden silence, or the whispers low,
My weary heart its throbbings cease,
My face turned pale as deadly pale,
And mourn, in lamentation deep,
May ye get monie a merry story,
"To-morrow will I bow to my delight,
Woe unto us--not her--for she sleeps well:
And went in haste, to get in readiness,
Where the car climbed the Capitol;  far and wide
"Calces o' fossils, earths, and trees;
Had not a heavenly guide benignant led
But 'twas not long; for, sweeter than the rill
Then may Lapraik and Burns arise,
And art thou come? and art thou true?
And stare them from me? But no, like a spark
Is the dread sceptre and dominion dire
But chiefly thou, apostle Auld,
Of silent happiness, of slumberous ease:
Had watch'd for years in forlorn hermitage,
For me--farthest from earthly port to roam
Where he shall rest him on his pilgrimage;
And thought it Pegasus. Ah dismal soul'd!
Weel stang'd by market, mill, and smiddie,
To Hague or Calais takes a waft,
He croon'd his gamut, one, two, three,
An' no forgetting wabster Charlie,
Past the near meadows, over the still stream,
To say her prayers, douce, honest woman!
Where'er I look: but yet, I'll say 'tis naught--
Which linger yet about lone gothic arches,
At length poor Mailie silence brak.
Vain fear! the Suliotes stretched the welcome hand,
One native charm, than all the gloss of art."
But come ye who the godlike pleasure know,
Jane, I'll be bound, was spotless as the dove,
But a miller us'd him worst of all--
Mark'd with most flimsy mottos, and in large
Of man and steed, o'erthrown beneath his horn;
Thy melodies of woods, and winds, and waters,
The mirth and fun grew fast and furious:
Which unto his was bound by stronger ties
And drinks the news as drunkards drink their ale.
She could as soon have crush'd away the life
And can I e'er these benefits forget?
Nae gentle dames, tho' e'er sae fair,
Insult, and blind, and stifle up my pomp.--
There came a noise of revellers: the rills
The sword I forsook for the sake of the church;
Her Coliseum stands;  the moonbeams shine
Till the Sun's rays with added flame were filled!
Poor lovers lay at rest from joys and woes.--
If I drink of small swipes while Sir John's lying there.
But wither'd beldams, auld and droll,
But the dire feeling, O farewell for ever!
Till coward death behind him jumpit,
O'erwrought with symbols by the deepest groans
His heart more truly knew that peal too well
In midst of his own brightness, like the bulk
An' bairns greet for them when they're dead.
An aching, broken heart, my Katy!
Where truant 'prentices, yet young in sin,
Late crippl'd of an arm, and now a leg,
Whose verse in manhood's pride sublimely flows,
The rich, the poor, the great, and small,
Proud of herself, and proud of him,
The voice I hear this passing night was heard
And mellows on the hedge the jetty sloes,
Its hungry hugeness, seeming ready ripe
Alas, how chang'd the times to come!
What if these barren boughs the bee not loves;
For lo! 'tis for the Father of all verse.
I sat and ey'd the spewing reek,
The young anes rantin' thro' the house,--
But when the lingering twilight hour was past,
And drops again when no more noise it hears.
There's ev'n I'm tauld i' the court
Danced on the shore the daughters of the land,
Of law and all its terrors as Bumtagg;
Thou, autumn, wi' thy yellow hair,
In ancient days by emperor and clown:
Now was he slumbering towards heaven's gate,
How to feed fierce the crooked stings of fire,
But, Tibbie, lass, tak my advice,
Happier in this than mightiest Bards have been,
Whose hearts the tide of kindness warms,
While hind ones see and shun the fall in time.
That greets the stranger with so fair a face;
Syne, wi' a social glass o' strunt,
And on their placid foreheads part the hair.
The eastern soft wind, and his galley now
The clear air for a while--a passing guest,
"You're overtasked, good Simon Lee,
Of all its wreathed pearls her hair she frees;
Here are we met, three merry boys,
They dun benevolence with shameless front;
Their wings chivalrous into the clear air,
What 'tis I mean, and feel his being glow:
The very ocean has its hour of rest,
The pie-bald jacket let me patch once more;
And when he thinks his pace is slack;
Sluggishly by, ere more contentment swept
It stands and spreads like danger in a wood,
Worse than the torment's self: but rather tie
When thy thickest jobs are done;
Blackening on every side, and overhead
An' bout a house that's rude an' rough
And where hens lay, and when the duck will hatch.
Her voice is the song of the morning,
Like hafflins-ways o'ercomes him
How lived--how loved--how died she? Was she not
The loveliest form she e'er gave birth.
When feather'd tribes are courting,
For there was striving, in its piteous tongue,
Saying moreover, "Isabel, my sweet!
And fill all fruit with ripeness to the core;
To thresh my back at sic a pitch?
Or speakin' lightly o' their limmer,
That lap (their very nourishment!) their brother's blood.
And full-grown lambs loud bleat from hilly bourn;
Or lift me with thee to some starry sphere?
Now while the silent workings of the dawn
Of earthly structures, in His honour piled,
"Saturn, look up!--though wherefore, poor old King?
I should just be as strong and as stubborn again.
With an atoning smile a more than earthly crown,
Beneath the moon's unclouded light,
In breezy rest among the nodding stalks.
Poor wights! nae rules nor roads observin';
That I may catch thy melting art;
Leap from Eurotas' banks, and call thee from the tomb?
"Whare are you gaun, my bonie lass,
Of moon or stars he takes no heed;
Freckled nest-eggs thou shalt see
Built me a little bark of hope, once more
Oh reader! now that I might tell
Who seek the water for their Sunday joys;
Would swagger, swear, get drunk, kick up a riot,
Forbye a cowt o' cowt's the wale,
More self-destroying, leading, by degrees,
To where he stood, hid from the torch's flame,
Sweet Vision, with the wild dishevelled hair,
Lo, Nemi!  navelled in the woody hills
The seal on the cold ice with piteous bark
O, dreary's the night wi' a crazy auld man!
Thou left'st us darkling in a world of tears.
Of death, for the fair form had gone again.
Of lovely Laura in her light green dress,
Its delicate blossoms to the dew;
With axe at root he felled thee to the ground
Free as the winds, that breathe upon my cheek
I went in the fields with the leisure I got,
Any more subtle fluid in her veins
Compar'd wi' you--O fool! fool! fool!
And breathe them sighingly among the boughs,
Right gladly proving, what she'd just foretold,
Within a little space again it gave
Could I for shame, could I for shame,
For puppies like you there's but few,
When Nelly lightly skipt the stile,
When day is gane, and night is come,
Shall he be guilty of their hireling crimes,
My future days to her fane consecrate."
Something more high perplexing in thy face!"
An' riches still may fly them, O;
I hear it--for in vain I leuk.--
Sound mournfully upon the winds and low;
And, for those simple times, his garments were
While worth in the mind o' my Phillis
By Derwent's side my Father's cottage stood,
O Lassie, art thou sleeping yet,
May bliss domestic smooth his private path;
And curst be the cause that shall part us!
My flocks and my Mary's sweet cot in my eye.
On roars the flood, all restless to be free,
Victors of countless kings, or puppets of a scene?
And hailed thee, not perchance without a tear.
Ye are sae grave, nae doubt ye're wise;
And Corinth on the left; I lay reclined
High shelt'ring woods and wa's maun shield
Blustering about my ears: aye, thou shalt see,
Of simple ponds, where idle shepherd dreams,
O wha will buy the groanin' maut?
Portend the deeds to come:--but he whose nod
Of bawdry brings the blushes in her face.
To goodly vessels; many a sail of pride,
This was a kinsman o' thy ain--
His fate the moral lurks of destiny;
A heavenly beacon in their dreary woe.
Ignorant as babe unborn I passed the pond
The sage will mingle with each moral theme
The bramble's dwindled to a bramble!
Yea, slimy things did crawl with legs
Their summer coolness; pent up butterflies
That nipt my flower sae early!--
And oft as morning from her lattice peeps
Their glittering mass i' the Sun, and have surveyed
Just when the light of morn, with hum of bees,
The guns fired off amid the strife, but little hope had we;
And next she wonder'd how his eyes could miss
If thou on men, their works and ways,
At intervals, some bird from out the brakes
There is no need of boot or spur,
From high Olympus had he stolen light,
Of stone, or marble swart; their import gone,
Sing, hey my braw John Highlandman!
Unprofitable, and the fever of the world,
Even with its own desiring phantasy,
Rock and reel, and spinnin' wheel,
O Moon! old boughs lisp forth a holier din
When evening Phoebus shines serene,
To save them from stark reprobation,
What brings me back the gate again;
To search the book, and in the warming air
And Whigs to hell did flee, man.
An' hey, sweet ane-and-twenty, Tam,
In thine own depth. Hail, gentle Carian!
She, sinking, said, "I'm thine for ever?"
Close up its bloodshot eyes, nor see despair!
To that fair shadow'd passion puls'd its way--
Wi' Allan, or wi' Gilbertfield,
Or must such minds be nourished in the wild,
Is he whose head conceived, whose hand prepared.
As spotless as she's bonnie, O:
Low lies the heart that swell'd with honest pride.
And swear on thy white hand, lass,
Lay like a load on my weary eye,
To light and joy the good restore,
Hath it indeed been plundered, or but cleared?
Then, howe'er crowns and coronets be rent,
All stops as if no bird was anywhere.
All lovely colours there you see,
Let not quick Winter chill its dying hour!--
Old elm, that murmured in our chimney top
Some gleams of sunshine 'mid renewing storms:
"Beneath my palm trees, by the river side,
And print on thy soft cheek a parent's kiss,--
Rattlin' the corn out-owre the rigs,
An unknown time, surcharg'd with grief, away,
Brows'd by none but Dian's fawns
"And O! be sure to fear the Lord alway!
Could e'er have touch'd there. Sounds Æolian
Whare horn nor bane ne'er daur unsettle
And call the trembling vowels to account.--
Along the ground they took a winding course.
And I was fear'd my heart would tine,
He pitied the man that was tied to a wife;
Ah, me! what hand can pencil guide, or pen,
Defies at first our Nature's littleness,
And the old cock, with wattles and red comb,
His foolish heart from its mad pompousness,
But let us part fair foes; I do believe,
The bay may lose its summer flower,
A gold chain round her neck so fair;
With their large eyes, all glistening gray and bright,
But could not: therefore all the billows green
Ev'n thou who mourn'st the Daisy's fate,
Were high about Pomona: here is cream,
There's not a mother, no not one,
There is a tomb in Arqua;--reared in air,
Near the sea-side I reached a ruined fort:
An' there will be rich brother nabobs,
But wept alone those days, for why should she adore?
The world were blest did bliss on them depend,
A humid eye, and steps luxurious,
Except when drunk he stacher't thro' it,
Thou strik'st the young hero--a glorious mark!
For the man that lo'es his mistress weel,
By pensive Sadness, not by Fiction, led--
But spare to speak, and spare to speed;
An' darklins graipit for the bauks,
Where little pebbles wear as smooth
Through sweet evening's sprinkled pearls,
Bellied like hooped keg, and chuffy face
Where the Day joins the past Eternity;
Here's our ragged brats and wallets!
The latest relic of her ancient reign--
When the colossal fabric's form is neared:
The ploughman came up and cut short his old tune,
Who loves his own smart shadow in the streets
And Majesty, flash their full lightnings by,
Burnt green and blue and white.
Of Jove, those tears have given me a thirst
Peering above the trees, the steeple tower,
Dark clouds, and muttering of winds morose.
Not vainly did the early Persian make
There is not such a treat among them all,
Bleaching beneath the twittering heat to hay
Right on their heads. My Lord was sorely frightened;
Her very by-word sprung from Victory,
That glar'd before me through a thorny brake.
"Na, waur than a'!" cries ilka chiel,
To finish on to-morrow's eve;--
Tho' faith, that day I doubt ye'll never see;
But viewed them not with misanthropic hate:
Vex'd like a morning eagle, lost, and weary,
His heart will never get aboon!
Then let us toast John Barleycorn,
Gone are the bright rays of their soft blue eyes;
For here thou hast a chosen race:
She laugh'd at first, then felt for her poor work.
Came mother Cybele! alone--alone--
Then wherefore should I fear to die?
How far beyond!" At this a surpris'd start
Now lav'rocks wake the merry morn,
That my own soul has to itself decreed.
Best prize of better acts! they bear away,
And mind still, you'll find still,
At kirns and weddings we'se be there,
And all that mote to luxury invite,
May never wicked fortune touzle him!
And, like Elisha's spirit, gain
If Venus yet had got his nose off;
"The skeletons of leaves that lag
A garden-pot, wherein she laid it by,
Of him who hailed thee loveliest, as thou wast--
Flutter'd in the besieging wind's uproar;
Last day I grat wi' spite and teen,
Ye're nought but senseless asses, O:
With brain-born dreams of Evil all their own.
Beckon'd their sons to silence; while each cheek
Who, through an idiot blink, will see unpack'd
To take into the air my quiet breath;
Ye deaf and senseless minutes of the day,
Improvident of waste, till every bough
Deaf to light Zephyrus it would not move;
Nor can remembrance, Mathew! bring to view
And Life's enchanted cup but sparkles near the brim.
Battle's magnificently-stern array!
This very night: good angels her deceive!
Ye wild whistling blackbirds in yon thorny den;
In all this quiet luxury; and hath set
And die, that living might have proved her shame;
To break my dream the vessel reached its bound:
The storm without might rair and rustle--
Behold through each lack-lustre, eyeless hole,
Lurk there no hearts that throb with secret pain,
No sculptured marble here, nor pompous lay,
But France got drunk with blood to vomit crime;
Two games, poor thing, Jane dearly loved to play.
Feel all I see less dazzling but more warm?
Dazzled and drunk with Beauty,  till the heart
In which her voice should wander. 'Twas a lay
But the houlet cry'd frae the castle wa',
The balmy gales awake the flowers,
Lord, mind Gawn Hamilton's deserts,
Kissed by the breath of heaven, seems coloured by its skies.
Nor stooped once, though thousands round her grew,
Find balm to soothe her bitter--rankling wounds:
(Heaven's mother send us grace)
That sings on Cessnock banks unseen,
Into the brain ere one can think upon it;
(Whether impell'd by all-directing Fate,
Ambitious for the hallowing of thine eyes;
He crush'd him 'tween the stones.
They say, full six months after this,
And left the primal city of the land,
No step between submission and a grave?
Here's to budgets, bags, and wallets!
Round the sweet smelling closen and rich woods
Midst a contentious world, striving where none are strong.
Along his burning page, distempered though it seems.
The old man rais'd his hoary head and saw
Put sleekly on one side with nicest care;
With warmer love, oh! with far deeper zeal
In white robes, and themselves in order placed
More pleasantly by playing woman's part,
Few, who with gorgeous pageantry enrobe
Snapping his lucid fingers merrily!--
If she must go or she must stay:
A resting place, thus much comes clear and plain;
Pique her and soothe in turn--soon Passion crowns thy hopes.
Utter a gorgon voice? Does yonder thrush,
His passion, cruel grown, took on a hue
An hundred airy harps! And she hath watch'd
For one as sorrowful: thy cheek is pale
Why were they proud? again we ask aloud,
As through the glen it wimpl't;
To a loud hymn, that sounds far, far away
He hugs his chain, and owns the reign
Upon a couch, near to a curtaining
And winter nights were dark and rainy;
They'd conquer'd and ruin'd a world beside;
Thus answer'd, while his white melodious throat
Was hung a silver bugle, and between
So Maggie runs, the witches follow,
If thou art ripe to taste a long love dream;
O'er pebbly crystal, and o'er golden sands;
But by thy honest turf I'll wait,
Amid this mighty fuss just let me mention,
And laugh to hear the thunder in their ears.
I prayed, yet every day I thought
John Barleycorn's mighty and there he will lie.
I'd soon try your spirit by cracking your crown.
His image in the dusk she seem'd to see,
Therefore I eager followed, and did curse
And niest my heart I'll wear her,
The strong wind reach'd the ship: it roar'd
He may do weel for a' he's done yet,
That oft deceive, but very rarely cloy.
And the strange constellations which the Muse
And when he hears the hunters far and wide
There let him bouse, an' deep carouse,
A fair but froward infant her own care,
With earnest heed, and tremulous intent,
But staumrel, corky-headed, graceless gentry,
And thou hast plighted me love o' the dearest!
I also think--so may I be a bride!
From all I may be, or have been before,
Some books are lies frae end to end,
With thought and semblance undefined,
And who so stout of limb as he?
Still self-dependent in her native shore,
But soon his eyes grew brilliant, when she told
And he himself as nothing:--if he was
Too soon, my friends, you went away;
They heaved in John Barleycorn,
Of virgin bloom paled gently for slight fear.
Who whispers him so pantingly and close?
A world of other unguess'd offices.
Enter: its grandeur overwhelms thee not;
And often lay away and breed and come
Lycius from death awoke into amaze,
All day they're playing in their Sunday dress--
"Endymion! Ah! still wandering in the bands
Upon the skirts of human-nature dwelling
Thine eyes by gazing; but I cannot live
Far as the slabbed margin of a well,
"Aye, but a buzzing by my ears has flown,
Dear as the temple's self, so does the moon,
Had you the wealth Potosi boasts,
Fountains grotesque, new trees, bespangled caves,
He eats (a moment's stoppage to his song)
I'll toast ye in my hindmost gillie,
Let me sound an alarm to your conscience--
And let us be thus comforted; unless
The desert, forest, cavern, breaker's foam,
And are as blest as spiders over flies.
Who said that not the soul alone
Hark! forth from the abyss a voice proceeds,
Egeria! sweet creation of some heart
The spectre Death, had he substantial power to harm.
This is this world--sweet dewy blossom!"--_Woe!
So that it smelt more balmy than its peers
﻿    The wintry west extends his blast,
The firetail tells the boys when nests are nigh
Who for her favour oft had sued,
Its stature seem'd lang Scotch ells twa,
Ourselves at once to vengeance; we might die;
Our fleetest falcon scarce can fly
From the red gash, fall heavy, one by one,
There those four shouted forth old Saturn's name;
A sound which makes us linger;--yet--farewell!
Dead, even resentment, for his injur'd page,
We mark the foremost kick against a stone,
And in that agony, across my grief
But now he's quat the spurtle-blade,
The mattock totter'd in his hand;
The silent moon shone high o'er tow'r and tree:
While her robes flaunted with the daffodils.
The lad that is dear to my babie and me.
Then Shaw's and Dalrymple's eloquence,
I saw grim Nature's visage hoar
It may be, still a something of the day
Of pale-mouth'd prophet dreaming.
Most like a sojourning demi-god, and leave
Ye cootie moor-cocks, crousely craw;
By grief enfeebled was I turned adrift,
So long, sweet Poet of the year!
From rock to rock leaps with delirious bound,
Listen'd in pain and pleasure at the birth
The happy tenants share his rounds;
Let others fear, to me more dear
It aches in loneliness--is ill at peace
Where the poor suffering wretch bows down
Press'd her cold finger closer to her lips.
And think my being truly blest;
They knew not whence this bounty, and elate
By art untaught, each labouring spouse
Wi' mercies temp'ral and divine,
And through the drift, deep-lairing sprattle
Yet in famed Attica such lovely dales
As haunts the unquenched soul--parched--wearied--wrung--and riven.
That breath about my eyes? Ah, thou wilt steal
Provok'd beyond bearing, at last she arose,
If Providence has sent me here,
Glowing, and circumfused in speechless love--
They come but never seem to die.
Now making monarchs' necks thy footstool, now
Who worship him with notes more sweet than words,
Full of adoring tears and blandishment,
Endymion was calm'd to life again.
Gay were her minstrels once, for free her throng,
Scion of Chiefs and Monarchs, where art thou?
Then, though a minister grow dorty,
Portion of that around me; and to me
Methought I fainted at the charmed touch,
Disparted, and far upward could be seen
Now a' is done that men can do,
Of thy disparted nymphs? Through what dark tree
How doubly severer, Maria, thy fate,
The naked eye, thy form, as it should be;
I would not their vile breath should crisp the stream
Why does his lady smile, pleasing her eye
I wake, and there is nothing there.
One after one by the horned Moon
Is that enough for you to souse
Though clouds of malice passed thy sun,
She forms the thing, and christens it--a Poet.
For tho' ten Grahams were in his coat,
Of stirring branches, and the bud which brings
Gone--glimmering through the dream of things that were:
To wrong another by the name of right;
But let me laugh awhile, I've mickle time to grieve."
A swarm flock round to help their fellow-men.
And snatch the blossoms in such eager haste
An' nought but his han' darg, to keep
Were clos'd in sullen moisture, and quick sighs
In flirting fits of anger carps aloud,
When evening shades in silence meet,
Manifestations of that beauteous life
What deep wounds ever closed without a scar?
Which still as usual pattered fast around,
Now, auld Kilmarnock, cock thy tail,
Our land who wi' chapels has stor'd;
This simple stone directs pale Scotia's way
The bitter blast that round me blaws,
Their master's an' their mistress's command,
But these recede. Above me are the Alps,
Is gall and wormwood to an enemy.
The breathing pestilence that rose like smoke!
The sea-swell took her hair. Dead as she was
To see glad butterflies and smiling flowers.
Most delicate, as though afraid to smutch
Tho' naething should divulge it:
An' bid him burn this cursed tether,
All join the chase, but few the triumph share;
Still comes upon the thorny bowers
Now if ye're ane o' warl's folk,
No housing from the storm and tempests mad,
Its topmost arch, and gently pauses there--
Young Harry was a lusty drover,
Me and his children hungering in his view:
Presided o'er the sons of light:
Precedence takes of rosy fingered spring;
Round bush and tree, soft-brushing, in his speed,
Might gather o'er her beauty, and a gloom
Love in the meadow, field, and glen,
Nightly dreams, and thoughts by day,
As praying's the ton of your fashion;
Foxes and statesmen, subtile wiles insure;
Shall be himself destroyed at last
An' by her een wha was a dear ane!
For the sky and the sea, and the sea and the sky
And wave thy silver pinions o'er my head.
Now farewell light--thou sunshine bright,
It is a mass of knotted joints,
"And thy skinny hand so brown"--
O, free my weary eyes from tears,
But blessings on your frosty pow,
And when he rested, to his dog's surprise,
And this green pastoral landscape, were to me
Only to meet again more close, and share
When Paphos fell by Time--accurséd Time!
Young Phœbe's, golden hair'd; and so 'gan crave
And my freedom's my lairdship nae monarch dare touch.
O let me pluck it for thee." Thus she link'd
Into a pretty shrinking with a bite
Him all in all unto her doting self.
Here didst thou dwell, here schemes of pleasure plan,
Mine shall escape the doom thine eyes assign
Fearing her mother, when she'd torn her gown.
In them suspended, recked not of the awe
There's ae wee faut they whiles lay to me,
His angry spirit healed and harmonized
An' ay was gude to me an' mine;
To the trees and mountains; and there soon appear
Let fall a sprig of yew tree in his path;
Here on this spot of earth. Search, Thea, search!
Return him safe to fair Strathspey,
The owlets hoot, the owlets curr,
Through hollow snows and rivers wide.
To pay your Queen, with due respect,
That he frae our lasses shou'd wander awa:
Columns and idol-dwellings--Goth or Greek--
Could lend out of that moment's store
And at our leisure, when ye like,
That on this frail, uncertain state,
Freedom, that leaves us more confined,
How silent that tongue which the echoes oft tired,
That I might breathe a living song to thee.
O, let me steal one liquid kiss!
There all her charms she does compile;
That breast, how dreary now, and void,
Amaist as soon as I could spell,
He canna hae lure to spare for me.
Is linked the electric chain of that despair,
The blisses of her dream so pure and deep
And all the gloom and sorrow of the place,
Her fellows flee--she checks their base career;
And sought her more and more, and loved her best in wrath.
Learning his tuneful trade from ev'ry bough;
You, wha ken hardly verse frae prose,
Who has not sixpence but in her possession;
_Round_ him are icy rocks, and loudly blow
As headlong foam a hundred floods;
Revered defender of beauteous Stuart,
Oh, Albuera! glorious field of grief!
Time, the Avenger! unto thee I lift
The Stars they shot along the sky;
Or headlong run, and be a second Jane;
Life's self is nourish'd by its proper pith,
For two or three topers to take into charge.
His diamond path with fretwork, streaming round
But not in silence pass Calypso's isles,
My heart's in the Highlands wherever I go.
How's a' the folk about Glenconner?
Conceal yoursel' as weel's ye can
Sae may, shou'd we to hell's yetts come
Her Sons too weak the sacred shrine to guard,
And fair fa' my Collier Laddie.
O had she but been of a lower degree,
And hailed the morning with a cheer--
Which seem'd full loath this happy world to leave;
O that's the lassie of my heart,
It's no in wealth like Lon'on bank,
The Tuscan Father's Comedy Divine;
And fatal have her Saturnalia been
When first my brave Johnnie lad
Her caresses shall lull me, her music shall soothe;
Thus Harold deemed, as on that Lady's eye
An' morning poussie whidden seen,
The ae best fellow e'er was born!
They drew me thretteen pund an' twa,
Old poets have sung, and old chronicles tell,
Sweet fa's the eve on Craigie-burn,
A leal, light heart was in my breast,
These, these will give the world another heart,
Blush-tinted cheeks, half smiles, and faintest sighs,
When he had better far have stretch'd his limbs
There's nothing to moisten the mouth of a fly.
On this scroll thou seest written in characters fair
To swell the gourd, and plump the hazel shells
Cheerless night that knows no morrow!
The delicatest air: air verily,
Canst thou wreck his peace for ever,
Enough, alas! in humble homes remain,
Who waits and hopes and wishes for success
Seen through the steams and vapour of his dungeon,
Fearless and full of life: the gush of springs,
Lives with him, near the waterfall,
A new creation with his magic line,
But man is a sodger, and life is a faught:
They take away, as well as eat,
Their vote shall be Glencaird's, man?
My hands, and eyes, and heart, and crave of thee a gift:
The many-pounders of the Banks,
"No dream, alas! alas! and woe is mine!
That in their swarthy rings were dwelling.
And now she's got into the town,
The hedge rose swelled to hips,
Is just as true's the Deil's in h--ll
My mother, she will break her heart;
And lonely see the shooting stars appear,
No apples would I gather from the tree,
A three-taed leister on the ither
And your life like the new driven snaw,
By Allan stream I chanced to rove
But stooks are cowpet wi' the blast,
The very Glaciers have his colours caught,
Wi' joy the tentie seedsman stalks;
Sleep, quiet with his poppy coronet:
And wilt thou vainly seek to know
That with a score of light green brethen shoots
When showers fell on thy many coloured shade
Up to the zenith,--hieroglyphics old,
Is nocht to what poor she endures,
The graceful bend, and the voluptuous swell:
When first the human race began,
Sweet days a lovely graduate, still unshent,
Nane other love, nane other dart,
Made close inquiry; from whose touch she shrank,
I fear my Lord Panmure is slain,
From his right hand there swung a vase, milk-white,
Veil'd Melancholy has her sovran shrine,
Curse thou his basket and his store,
And from the flowers a sultry smell
And bowed the bent-head loaded to the ground;
Here, there, he points his threatening front, to suit
Lost to this world and all eternity;
Dim-backward as I cast my view,
O Echo, Echo, from some sombre isle,
Feed the young bard, that madly sips
The world of waters rolls and rushes bye,
Thus Providence, right understood,
The revelries, and mysteries of night:
There are some feelings Time can not benumb,
I see her wave thy towering plumes afar,
Far seen in Greek, deep men o' letters,
He up and snapt and bolted through the hedge.
This is your birth-day Tom, and I rejoice
Not native in such barren vaults. Give ear!
I'd seek some dell, and in my arms
Though more than Hope can claim, could Friendship less require?
Is all that desperate Valour acts in vain?
But tho' my back be at the wa',
The crouching vassal to the tyrant wife!
No care had I nor fear of want,
Picking her pouch as bare as winter
These forests, and to thee they safe shall be
That's like an infant's grave in size,
Of loveliness new born."--Apollo then,
There for the weary still a Haven smiles,
In thicket hid I curs'd the haggard scene--
And the thyme it is wither'd, and rue is in prime.
"Some hint the lover's harmless wile;
Despise that shrimp, that wither'd imp,
Of his heart's blood: 'twas very sweet; he stay'd
That its mild light creates to heal again:
When bright processions took their airy march
With one spare room to welcome every guest,
'Till by himsel' he learn'd to wander,
For thee, she will thy every dwelling grace,
Wrung with the wounds which kill not, but ne'er heal;
But when will he dance like Tam Glen?
Or haughty Chieftain, 'mid the din of arms,
After a night of some quaint jubilee
With gain the merchandise of farms;
The children--silent all the while--
He drives away and beats them every one,
List'ning to the wild birds singing,
There lives a lad, the lad for me,
To greet Albania's Chief, whose dread command
Of soothing warmth, of dalliance supreme;
Nor staid to welcome here thy wanderer home,
I little thought the time was near,
While Florence vainly begs her banished dead and weeps.
As when, upon a tranced summer-night,
Call me his queen, his second life's fair crown!
O Maker of sweet poets, dear delight
Flopping in the labourer's face.
Sits on more shaggy summits, and where roar
"And now, my love, my seraph fair, awake!
And spring the mop upon the servant boys.
Shall here nae mair find quarter:
And love took pains to keep her dry,
If a cherub, on pinions of silver descending,
Lamenting and yet envying such a doom,
And hot day leaves it in its pride.
Let's sing about our noble sel's;
Envy the innate flash which such a Soul could mould:
With the dark dishevelled hair,
And left poor Maggie scarce a stump.
And creatures for his pleasure slain.
After a little sleep: or when in mine
And nature claimed thee her domestic tree.
Let these describe the undescribable:
Pride points the path that leads to Liberty;
Does the one who adores thee still live in thy breast?
I pause; and at length, through the glimmering grate,
And Tellus feels his forehead's cumbrous load.
And tearful ladies made for love, and pity:
Trifling his ivy-dart, in dancing mood,
And so I can prepare without a sigh
By night, by day, a-field, at hame,
But gif ye want ae friend that's true--
In this dark city, nor would condescend
Impute it not, good Sir, in ane
Nor makes the hour one moment less.
For motley foundling fancies, stolen or stray'd?)
And to the wood at length is come,
Can mingle music fit for the soft ear
And your petitioner shall ever--
(Alas! her woes will still pervade my strain!)
Their sarks, instead o' creeshie flannen,
Their ladies fair, that in the distance seem
The broken tools, that Tyrants cast away
Let us th' important _now_ employ,
Sunk on the earth, defac'd its lovely form,
And to the Lusians did her aid afford:
Sweet as the dewy milk-white thorn,
The flatterer of thy fierceness--till thou wert
Now is thy time, to perish, or display
The honours masonic prepare for to throw;
To linger on her lily shoulders, warm
And for the youth, quick, let us strip for him
But what avails the land to them,
Another will entice me on, and on
Ah, Chloris, since it may na be,
Sly they climb in softest tread,
Blue-headed titmouse now seeks maggots rare,
But whalpit some place far abroad,
Where his vast neck just mingles with the spine,
Will nane the Shepherd's whistle mair
But to the thorn, and to the pond
If the ass were the king o' the brutes,
Sweet on the fragrant, flow'ry sward,
It ceased--I caught light footsteps; and anon
From our dark spirits. Such the sun, the moon,
For mony a heart thou host made sair,
Now while I cannot hear the city's din;
Or tear me piece-meal with a bony saw,
Is sure an uncouth sight to see,
Which, though 'twere wild,--as on the plundered wreck
And so he kept, until the rosy veils
The streams with softest sound are flowing,
Again ye'll nourish fresh and fair;
The Nith shall run to Corsincon,
Thy father cares not for my breast,
Shall let the busy, grumbling hive
If I had twenty thousand lives,
No earth of thine is lost in vulgar mould,
Half-whispering there the Greek is heard to prate;
Nor joy nor fear is mine again.
Many might after brighter visions stare:
You on an auld wife's flainen toy;
And thinks the angler mad, and loudly storms
By aught than Romans Rome should thus be laid?
Can it deny the chiefdom of green groves?
With all the leafy luxury of May.
The insulted mind he sought to quench, and blend
And snow in scarce a feather's seen to fall.
For what?--to gie their malice skouth
The little swallow's wanton wing,
The starry fable of the Milky Way
So merrily they spend their summer day,
Content and luve brings peace and joy--
What is right, and what is wrang, by the law, by the law?
The thorn which I've described to you,
But the vast shipwreck of my life's esteems;
Now crystal clear are the falling waters,
A venerable thing! and so his song
Nightly dreams, and thoughts by day,
Gilt fashion's follies pass thee by,
With new sensations his old memory fills,
From the exaltation of Apollo's bow;
But as man's unbelieving taste came round,
Which mother brushes ere she lays it bye
Or woodland bank! In ignorance we muse:
Could'st thou to malice lend an ear!
Blood of those whose eyes can kill.
The stream it is a common stream,
And kith and kin o' Cassillis' blude;
"May ne'er misfortune's gowling bark,
Would nature with the boon comply,
Him only 'tis justice to praise.
What he must never feel: and so, lost man!
Her scarf into a fluttering pavilion;
Even now what wants thy stream?--that it should Lethe be.
No strain which shamed his country's creaking lyre,
And see his brother Hugh cut down.
Himself to quit at length this mountain-land,
An' owre the hill gaed scrievin,
Was seen such wonder underneath the stars.
Meg grew sick--as he grew heal,
The very cat looks up and knows her face
Me, nae cheerfu' twinkle lights me;
For the insult swipes offered, or his hoops I will burst.
"Alas! how oft does goodness wound itself!
And I've got leave to spend an hour
Why were they proud? Because red-lin'd accounts
At length burst in the argent revelry,
Like good men in the truth of their behaviours
But none unite in one attaching maze
By blockheads' daring into madness stung;
Here is a shell; 'tis pearly blank to me,
I dreamt that they were fill'd with dew
Her head's instant out of the window
M'Quhae's pathetic manly sense,
L--d, I'se hae sportin' by an' by,
Of flowers, garlands, love-knots, silly posies,
And motion of the Soul which will not dwell
Was nothing else but secret love.
And towers of amethyst,--would I so tease
In silken beds and roomy painted hall.
"I am a-fear'd.--"Push on, push on!"
A shell for Neptune's goblet: she did soar
Your daddie's gear maks you sae nice;
Can tyrants but by tyrants conquered be,
"Such night as this was ne'er before,
As the break-covert blood-hounds of such sin:
Behind the picture-pasted screen
And yet I will, and tell my love all plain:
Nor to such downy rest can he allure them;
A morbid pleasure nourished, tracing here
To-morrow will I ask my lady's boon."--
While o'er us unheeded flee the swift hours o' love.
Old Ruth works out of doors with him,
Who lives beyond earth's boundary, grief is dim,
Thro' yellow waving fields we'll stray,
Wilt thou lay that frown aside,
Breathes of green fields and open sky,
We'll sculpture the marble, we'll measure the lay;
And the heart beating love as I'm clasp'd in her arms,
I'll fear na scant, I'll bode nae want,
They maun hae brose and brats o' duddies;
Phœbe is fairer far--O gaze no more:--
In milky nest, and sip them off at leisure.
While Harry held her by the arm--
And, if the sun looks through, tis with a face
The deed that I dared, could it merit their malice,
To cheer you thro' the weary widdle
He might not:--No, though a primeval God:
Some were athirst in soul to see again
Still shall I hail thee wi' sorrow and care;
Fawning a puppy at his master's side
May he be dad, and Meg the mither,
Of logs piled solemnly.--Ah, well-a-day,
Begone, you lying creature, then
Nae whip nor spur, but just a whattle
And of thy roses amorous of the moon,
Nae poet thought her worth his while,
With olive feathers and its ruddy breast;
Man and his hopes an adamantine wall,
Death hushed that pang for ever: with thee fled
But if success I must never find,
That queens it o'er our taste--the more's the pity:
Satan, gie him thy gear to keep,
When goavan, as if led wi' branks,
And sees, with self-approving mind,
One drops--then others--and the last that fell
Still anxious to secure your partial favour,
My little joy! my little pride!
And thinks peace bought and sold,
And each right-arm burnt like a torch,
Though there, his heresies in church and state
Till Fraser brave did fa', man,
The high crag cannot work me harm,
And all was still, save that the hill
For ever noisy and for ever gay
Gulphs in the morning light, and scuds along
I tremble to approach an angry God,
Redemption rose up in the Attic Muse,
Deep into Nature's breast the spirit of her hues.
And be liege-lord of all the Elves and Fays,
Did many a Roman chief and Asian King
Learning and Worth in equal measures trode
So young, so beautiful, and sweet
And gold-embroidered garments, fair to see;
They locked us in the harbour and would not let us go.
But browster wives an' whiskey stills,
And there he keeps them for his children's sakes,
Infants have nought to weep for ere they die;
Throughout her palaces imperial,
Yet then content could make us blest;
At mere remembering her pale laugh, and curse.
That auld capricious carlin, Nature,
For spite of his fine theoretic positions,
"Two of us in the church-yard lie,
I doubt he's but a grey-nick quill,
How they can dive in sight and unseen rise--
And gather up all fancifullest shells
To golden palaces, strange minstrelsy,
For there, wi' my lassie, the day lang I rove,
Fall from his hands--his idle scimitar
We must think rather, that in playful mood,
Where Devon, sweet Devon, meandering flows.
The western wave was all a flame,
The Marineres all 'gan work the ropes,
Of candied apple, quince, and plum, and gourd
But whoso entereth within this town,
Where your other souls are joying,
Or thro' each nerve the rapture dart,
"By thy long grey beard and thy glittering eye
The lily's hue, the rose's dye,
Their wrath how deadly! but their friendship sure,
And every soul from human trammels freed,
At buds and flowers were hinging, O,
And far into the moonlight dale,
The mosses, waters, slaps, and stiles,
And buzzes cheerily from bower to bower?
And calls him "drunken beast" and runs away--
Studied from that old spirit-leaved book
Love kept aloof, albeit not far remote,
To say in St. Stephen's the morn.
At every onward step proud domes arose
And view the glory of their festivals:
One ev'ning as I wandered forth
Reflects upon a diamond, my sweet dream
Whose ancestors, in days of yore,
When Gratitude or Valour bids them bleed,
With careless step I onward stray'd,
And I have many miles on foot to fare.
Though I have found them not, that there may be
Shed from the broadest of her elephants.
Upon its own producer, forthwith touch'd
And parritch-pats, and auld saut-backets,
If I that giver's bounty e'er disgrace;
Eternally away from thee all bloom
Have bred forth, not pale solitary doves,
Childe Harold at a little distance stood
Chill runs my blood to hear it rave--
Light lay the earth on Willy's breast,
Thou giv'st the ass his hide, the snail his shell,
This sleepy music, forc'd him walk tiptoe:
And Betty's still at Susan's side.
Round which is heard a spring-head of clear waters
When stranger passed, so often I have check'd;
For prophecies of thee, and for the sake
Had stood the test of mortal enmities
Such signs were mournful and alarming things,
When it shall please thee in our quiet home
But Jenny's jimps and jirkinet,
But first hang out, that she'll discern
Thou shalt remain, in midst of other woe
And scarcely gave the eldern leave to grow.
The lists are oped, the spacious area cleared,
If thro' that glen I gaed to thee,
And bow the knee to Pomp that loves to varnish guilt.
But so it was, none answer'd for a space,
And steeds with streamy manes--the charioteer
Not harsh nor grating, though of ample power
And mark by rustic bridge, oer shallow stream,
And aiblins when they winna stand the test,
An' crabbit names and stories wrack us,
Another from the bitterness of clay
And from the brink she hurries fast,
Sink downward to his dusky cave again.
An' hear it a', an' fear an' tremble!
Where Comyns ance had high command:
By him who made yon sun and sky--
Have bared their operations to this globe--
Fintray, my other stay, long bless and spare!
Crows crowd croaking over head,
Converse with Nature's charms, and view her stores unrolled.
All torment from my breast;--'twas even then,
The plough soon turns it into brown,
Altho' my bed were in yon muir,
Are grown the pretext for the eternal thrall
When these wild ecstasies shall be matured
An' fareweel dear, deluding woman!
That kills what it pretends to cure,
And so he rested, on the lonely ground,
And the broad winged sea-gull never at rest;
The piper loud and louder blew;
Or acorn-cups, by stock-doves plucked,
But mark the rustic, haggis-fed,
Long quiet she reign'd; till thitherward steers
But wi' a Lord--stand out, my shin!
Lang, lang, joy's been a stranger to me;
So noted ancient roundelays among.
There is a fresh and lovely sight,
Sun, moon, and stars withdrawn a';
The youngest brother ye wad whip
Saw this with pain, so arguing a want
In olden times. The world was on thy page
My little Edward, tell me why;"
With his thrusting--no matter; for nothing cared he.
"Hornbook was by, wi' ready art,
That float about the air on azure wings,
Cut Mercy with a sharp knife to the bone;
That he might pull the sledge for me.
But now the wild flowers round them only breathe:
To walk on his legs: but a child in the street
To speak as when on earth it was awake,
Of perished states he mourned in their decline,
And seems to listen: O that I might know
Meet owre a pint, or in the council-house;
"How many? seven in all," she said,
Its sweets upon the summer: graceful it grew
We might embrace and die: voluptuous thought!
Fain would I hide, what I fear to discover,
In gowany glens thy burnie strays,
An' play'd on man a cursed brogue,
For Jane was lovely in her Sunday dress,
And to the reckless gales unmanly moaning kept.
The man and his wine's sae bewitching!
"Strange, by my faith!" the Hermit said--
Ami here's to them we dare na tell,
The honest heart that's free frae a'
And sidelong fix'd her eye on Saturn's face:
A third--"to thee and me, love!"
Your friends ay love, your faes ay fear ye;
Which ev'n to name would be unlawfu'.
And long as one's shadow when the sun is low;
As highland craigs by thunder cleft,
Unfortunates on earth, we see at last
Then do not fear, my boy! for thee
When biting Boreas, fell and doure,
Still may thy pages call to mind
That's like to blaw a body blind?
The tottergrass it scarcely stirs at all.
Spare my luve, thou feathery snaw,
The kye stood rowtin i' the loan;
The friend of age, and guide of youth;
Ye tempests, rage! ye turbid torrents, roll!
For some slight cause of wrath, whence Life's warm stream must flow.
And was now rapt in tender hoverings
My home shakes in wind and showers,
Though twisted smooth with Harry's nicest care,
That griens for the fishes an' loaves;
And's good a servant, still old folks allow,
To think thee kind, but ah, it will not do!
O' marrying Bess to gie her a slave:
I may be distress'd, but I winna complain;
But to her heart, her heart was voluble,
Where all around proclaimed his high estate.
One, kneeling to a lyre, touch'd the strings,
But thee to comfort a poor lonely maid;
For though his locks be lyart gray,
She will bring thee, all together,
As with a palsied tongue, and while his beard
About their shaggy jaws. Avenging, slow,
An' first could thresh the barn;
With the surrounding maniacs, in the hell
Browseth; and, pensive o'er his scattered flock,
Spread a green kirtle to the minstrelsy:
He would not yield dominion of his mind
Nor will a bee buzz round two swelling peaches,
No sooner had I stepp'd into these pleasures
Here a proud people's passions were exhaled,
In vain to me the vi'lets spring;
'Twas pibroch, sang, strathspey, or reels,
If honest nature made you fools,
Bidding me trust in God, he stood and prayed,--
When midnight comes a host of dogs and men
How huff'd, and cuff'd, and disrespeckit!
But by the moon and stars so bright.
Thou tells o' never-ending care;
They told me 'twas an odd kind chiel
But like the little timid wren,
Onward it flies. From languor's sullen bands
When mad Eurydice is listening to't;
My little babe! thy lips are still,
The native revels of the troop began;
But turn your eye, and they are there again.
My Mary's asleep by thy murmuring stream--
As shells of walnuts, split in two
Than the isle of Delos. Echo hence shall stir
Wherefrom I take strange lore, and read it deep,
The closen with their ancient green,
Her hair in weird syrops, that would keep
Flow gently, I'll sing thee a song in thy praise;
In vain; the sweet nymph might nowhere be found,
An' ye had seen what I hae seen,
On the smooth wind to realms of wonderment;
Dark Paradise! where pale becomes the bloom
For Fancy's visions all unfitting;
"Guid-een," quo' I; "Friend, hae ye been mawin,
Ah, smile not so, my son: I tell thee true,
That the weight can no longer be borne,
And nostril beautiful Disdain, and Might
Left me dead-drifting to that fatal power.
Beneath the shelter of an aged tree;
So thine be the laurel, and mine be the bay;
Shakes hand with our own Ceres; every sense
Nae wonder then they've fatal been
For as delicious wine doth, sparkling, dive
Hark!--heard you not those hoofs of dreadful note?
An' aften labour them completely;
And when the welcome simmer shower
And all the bliss to be before to-morrow morn.
Anon his heart revives: her vespers done,
To make old prose in modern rhyme more sweet:
I doubt it's hardly worth the while
Wow, but your letter made me vauntie!
Made them a terror--'twas a pleasing fear,
Wi' saut tears trickling down your nose;
And onwards did his further journey take
An' come to my arms and kiss me again!
So, through the moonlight lane she goes,
And scorn, against all enemies prepared,
As though a rose should shut, and be a bud again.
And Mass and revel were alternate seen;
That well you know to honour:--"Life's very toys
In my youth's summer I did sing of One,
How genius, th' illustrious father of fiction,
For weel I wat they'll sairly miss him
And many hid their faces from the light:
One dyeth in his strength and, torn from ease,
Oh, what is death but parting breath?
Is sure enough to make a mortal man
Which plainly shows the fortune one's to have,
But some day ye may gnaw your nails,
He sways a nation,--turbulent and bold:
Fancies that our guid Brugh denies protection!
Of trumpets, shoutings, and belabour'd drums,
Faded before him, cower'd, nor could restrain
The ladies' hearts he did trepan,
Our thrissles flourish'd fresh and fair,
Upon the blue Symplegades:  long years--
Come then, enamour'd and fond of my anguish,
By sad mistakes and black mischances,
Her voice their only ransom from afar:
Lycius then press'd her hand, with devout touch,
He'll apprehend them, poind their gear;
How monie hearts this day converts
Dear to his country by the names
Much pain have I for more than loss of realms:
And thou wilt see the issue."--'Mid the sound
And this wan feeling peoples many a page--
Heard melodies are sweet, but those unheard
And overpowers the page where it would bloom again?
Now we're married--spier nae mair--
Could thy dear eyes in following mine
With simple flowers: let there nothing be
Where the mossy riv'let strays,
Hyperion, leaving twilight in the rear,
Soars on the spurning wing of injur'd merit!
We've faults and failings--granted clearly,
Thy glorious day is o'er, but not thine years of shame.
But now has come a cruel blast,
Here, foaming down the shelvy rocks,
Bold-following where your fathers led!
O'er her wild universe is skilful to diffuse:
His shoes, worn down by many blundering treads,
And B  spring, her fame to sing,
Heaven spare you lang to kiss the breath
Life's dearest bands untwining?
Their summer flight is short and low;
That wound degenerate ages cannot cure.
Though thou'st done worse to me.
Parnassian queans, I fear, I fear,
While o'er the harp pale Mis'ry moans,
The kings of Inde their jewel-sceptres vail,
And crooked glaive--the lively, supple Greek
Endymion! unhappy! it nigh grieves
Hurl the dark bulk along, scarce seen in dashing by.
But fate has will'd, and we must part.
Made a dim, silver twilight, soft he set
With many a filial tear circling the bed of death!
The lass wi' the bonnie black e'e.
He heard a voice distinctly; 'twas the youth's,
The youth of Caria plac'd the lovely dame
I wad gie a' Knockhaspie's land
He wore his sandal-shoon, and scallop-shell;
Me back to Scylla o'er the billows rude.
He turn'd--there was a whelming sound--he stept,
Over his sullen eyes: I saw him throw
And constant cacklings of new-laying hens,
Thus, Venice! if no stronger claim were thine,
She whisk'd against their eyes the sooty oil.
Lorenzo, courteously as he was wont,
And sweet the music trembles on the ear
Nor dared my hand at any door to knock.
Recovery came with food: but still, my brain
Stooping their shoulders o'er a horse's prance,
Blest be thy bloom, thou lovely gem,
Light, the first fruits of that intestine broil,
There daily I wander as noon rises high,
Leant to each other trembling, and sat so
Whose very voice gave sorrow mirth--
And he's the boy will blaud her!
And often, viewing their sweet smiles, I sighed,
How cesses, stents, and fees were rax'd,
So have your wills."--She pinched her box again,
An angel form's fa'n to thy share,
To see the brightness in each others' eyes;
_Dearest Endymion! my entire love!
And be thine own for aye, bonny Mary O!
My Sister! ('tis a wish of mine)
From stumbling over stumps and hillocks small;
She had nae will to say him na:
Like old Deucalion mountain'd o'er the flood,
If honest worth in heaven rise,
Haply 'tis when thy ruby lips part sweetly,
Thy gloom will sooth my cheerless soul,
Through sunny air. Add too, the sweetness
But for the Muse she'll never leave ye,
To stray away into these forests drear
So travell'd monkeys their grimace improve,
And Joy the art of true believing;
An unseiz'd heaven dying at his feet;
Goddess benign, point forth some unknown thing:
But far from such companionship to wear
Too brightly on the unpreparéd mind,
If 'twas too far that night for her soft feet.
Into a boundless blessing, which may vie
--The clock strikes three--a dismal knell!
All tenants of an ancient place
We're your ain bairns, e'en guide us as ye like,
Blow! swiftly blow, thou keel-compelling gale!
Wha for his friend an' comrade had him,
Lord grant mae duddie desperate beggar,
When sorrow wrings thy gentle heart,
There was a lad was born in Kyle,
Heal'd up the wound, and, with a balmy power,
"Or when the whirlwind's on the hill,
An' to the muckle house repair,
Drest as though bold Robin Hood
And, ever and anon, uprose to look
Onward he jolls, nor can the minstrel-throngs
She strains your infant to her joyless breast,
Or I am skilless quite: an idle tongue,
Of Heaven with upward eyes for all that they desire.
Where, as a monument of antique art,
Till thirty were not left alive
And as he from one trance was wakening
Joyful are the thoughts of home,
"Or in the castle he's pursuing,
Where Sculpture with her rainbow Sister vies;
But by a patient wing, a constant spell,
Upon its blossoms' pointed rays,
Those waves, we followed on till the dark Euxine rolled
Softening the roughest tempest almost calm
Then, as was wont, his palace-door flew ope
Keen on the helpless victim see him fly,
None through their cold disdain are doomed to die,
Then wham to chuse, and wham refuse,
Some fresher beauty varying round:
And my heart it stounds wi' anguish,
But joys which soothe, and not distract the ears,
But in the eye of love: there's not a sound,
Through Calpe's straits survey the steepy shore;
Lightly this little herald flew aloft,
A name, which to love, was once mark of a true heart,
Mingling--and made by Love--unto one mighty end.
With truth or lies they need not then be strict,
And chirrupt up his wings to dry upon the garden rail.
Though the strained mast should quiver as a reed,
Who hath not seen thee oft amid thy store?
Of vagrant dwellers in the houseless woods,
Farewell loves and friendships, ye dear tender ties--
Out owre a glass o' whiskey punch
And tells her tales by starts and fits.
And many a time, as wandering closer by,
Our gold and ripe-ear'd hopes. With not one tinge
To match some spots that lurk within this lowering coast.
And maun I still on Menie doat,
But she stood silent, for her heart was full.
Have all been borne, and broken by the accord
Phorcus, the sire of Gorgons. Neighbour'd close
The frost that freezes the life at my heart,
Over the unreturning brave,--alas!
I clos'd my lids and kept them close,
And from the long furrowed seams,
In nectar'd clouds and curls through water fair,
And Echo cons the doolfu' tale;
About Arcadian forests; and will shew
Tumble and litter there--the merry band
Wax gray and ghastly, withering ere their time,
For ere night's midmost, stillest hour was past,
--The stone pit with its shelvy sides
Where pleasure is the magic wand,
My voice shall with thy future visions blend,
Long, though not very many--since have done
And mourned and mourner lie united in repose.
Thy memory be as a dwelling-place
The fields did more than Eden seem
To meet her glorious brother's greeting beam.
Till Charlie Stewart cam' at last,
Look! how those winged listeners all this while
That scar'd away the meek ethereal Hours
Small, busy flames play through the fresh laid coals,
They vanish'd far away!--Peona went
My watchful dog, whose starts of furious ire,
The bonnie blink o' Mary's e'e!
Seem'd sooty, and o'er-spread with upturn'd gills
Sweet music breath'd her soul away, and sigh'd
Churchman and Votary alike despised.
Old Winter, with his frosty beard,
And should he live a thousand years,
Of light is poesy; 'tis the supreme of power;
Those twilight eyes?--Those eyes!--my spirit fails--
Ye blow upon the sod that wraps my friend:
Along the reedy stream; a half heard strain,
Which it would cope with, on delighted wing,
It may not be--those Baälites of pelf,
Now wild, to bend its arms in circling shade,
Unchanged in all except its foreign Lord,
And large, before enjoyment's gale,
The Tailor fell thro' the bed, thimbles an' a';
Or art thou waking, I would wit?
From the Land of Mist and Snow.
And sorely would the Gallic foeman rue,
An' did the buckskins claw, man;
By cruel fortune's undeserved blow?
Until her heart felt pity to the core
Sang not to her--strange! that honey
Without a groan, without a struggle dies.
Obeys thee--thou goest forth, dread, fathomless, alone.
Poor Betty now has lost all hope,
Gather around these summits, as to show
Is now the cruel fowler's prey;
More placid seemed his eye, and smooth his pallid front.
Thus Robert, victorious, the trophy has gain'd;
False to the heart, distorts the hollow cheek,
Some looking back, and some with upward gaze;
And all my story that much passion slew me;
Gang by me as tho' that ye car'd na a flie;
As life itself becomes disease,
Power--Glory--Strength--and Beauty all are aisled
So the unnumber'd sounds that evening store;
With the bonnie lass o' Ballochmyle.
Or else, thou kens, thy servant true
My love for thee has well been tried:
And, scathed by fire, the greensward's darkened vest
In hate, whose mining depths so intervene,
The bee that thro' the sunny hour
Drove Nymph and Satyr from the prosperous woods,
Plumes himself in Freedom's pride,
Hadst a more splendid trough and wider sty:--
"Nay, if thou'st got a laughsome tale,
O Death, hadst thou but spared his life,
Wi' ruffl'd sark an' glancing cane,
Passion their voices cooingly 'mong myrtles,
Who long with jiltish arts and airs hast strove;
And he'll be hame that's far awa.
Or "blindman-buffed" some morts of hours away--
I murder hate by field or flood,
Ae leg an' baith the trams are broken;
By horrid suffrance--mightily forlorn.
And give the best retreat she hopes to find.
But ne'er was in hell, till I met wi' a wife;
Which, were it not for many a mountain nigh
He always doted on the youth, and now
And Welsh,  who ne'er yet flinch'd his ground,
That wrongs thee, Willie Stewart.
Wi' dissipation, feud, an' faction.
And thine shall flourish, green and long,
May I never see it, may I never trow it,
Here's little save the river scene
Even here, into my centre of repose,
Thy dales, and hills, are fading from my view:
They laid him down upon his back,
Till whare ye sit, on craps o' heather
'Till half a leg was scrimply seen:
Sybil of months, and worshipper of winds,
My sense with their deliciousness was spell'd:
Rome for the sake of ages, Glory sheds
Tam tint his reason a' thegither,
Yet let us think upon the vernal showers
And thus the heart will do which not forsakes,
Warm mountaineer! for canst thou only bear
I kiss'd her owre and owre again,
Old Tiber! through a marble wilderness?
On this poor weakness!_ but, for all her strife,
Of seamen, and stout galley-rowers' toil:
Still, as in Scottish story read,
I saw him on the calmed waters scud,
Baith honest men and lasses bonnie,
A charm they know not; loved Parnassus fails,
"Fly, brother, fly! more high, more high,
Queen of the wide air; thou most lovely queen
Of lucid depth the floor, and far outspread
More suddenly than doth a moment go,
Fond, on thy little early ways,
Which shall atone for years; none need despair:
For as among us mortals omens drear
May be permitted, as my steps I bend
Are honour, virtue, conscience, all exil'd?
Ah! this is holiday to what was felt
Full well I feel thou wouldst not leave me. Still
Wi' monie a fulsome, sinfu' lie,
Found way unto Olympus, and made quake
Not thunderbolt on thunderbolt, till all
Life's dearest bands untwining?
But my Soul wanders; I demand it back
To dig more fervently than misers can.
Alive with sparkles--never, I aver,
Now half your din of tuneless sound
Athort the lift they start and shift,
The ploughman ran and gave a hearty shout,
It's for my honour he maun die.
No gifts have I from Indian coasts
The magazine in rocky durance stowed,
The river nobly foams and flows--
Queen Venus leaning downward open arm'd:
The waters with his spear; but at the splash,
And quotes thy treacheries to prove it true?
Verses from which the soul would never wean:
With its sad echo did the silence break.
Nay, even the yirth itsel' does cry,
And she set her foot so lightly where the early bee doth pass.
And found too late the cause of Sunday's grief;
'Tis real hangmen, real scourges bear!
But facts are chiels that winna ding,
Would be her ruin--as was just the case.
Say, beautifullest, shall I never think?
He rises when he likes himsel';
The passion"----"O lov'd Ida the divine!
With lofty periods when my verses fire him,
The stream, adown its hazelly path,
In tree and tower was Johnny seen,
Of rushy flags and sedges tied in sheaves,
We have imagined for the mighty dead;
And take the broad road while our feet are dry.
"I drew my scythe in sic a fury,
For rakish rooks, like Rob Mossgiel.
Or be deliver'd from this cumbrous flesh,
'Till she, like thee, all soil'd, is laid
For every tongue was loosed to gabble oer
Five scimitars, wi' murder crusted;
Her woollen aprons and drab gowns
But that she goes to this old thorn,
To clear Futurity his darling fame!
So thou wouldst thus, for many sequent hours,
He whistl'd up Lord Lennox' march,
Regard and weigh yon dust before it flies:
His yearly task, at bleak November's close,
Till his eye streamed with tears. In this deep vale
Her gentle limbs, and left the youth asleep.--
High Muses! let him hurry to the ending.
A noble end, are thirsty every hour.
Heav'n bless your honour'd, noble name,
Tears, big tears, gushed from the rough soldier's lid,
You leave your view the farther, O:
Udderless lambs, and in a little cup
Was managing St. Stephen's quorum;
The teasing burden of his foe to take;
The cold--the changed--perchance the dead, anew--
Setting up little tents about the fields
I'se ne'er ride horse nor hizzie mair;
The beauteous, seraph sister-band,
He loved his old hereditary nook,
When at the blithe end o' our journey at last,
Let half-starv'd slaves in warmer skies
Large honey-combs of green, and freshly teem'd
Wha thinks himsel nae sheep-shank bane,
Bestridden of gay knights, in gay apparel,
Could not the Grave forget thee, and lay low
Dew-drops, and dewy buds, and leaves, and flowers,
Poet, who hath been building up the rhyme
At their own shadows on the wall:
Was unto me, but why that I ne might
Ah, why should I such scenes outlive
Like one repenting in his latest moan;
Islands, and creeks, and amber-fretted strands
And mock the Giver's good intent.--
In lucent Thames reflected:--warm desires
Went noiseless as a passing noontide rain
Swith, in some beggar's haffet squattle;
When plundering herds assail their byke;
Yestreen lay on this breast o' mine
Eternity, stand laughing at old Time
Ye maukins, cock your fud fu' braw,
A good chiel wi' a pickle siller.
I love thee! and my days can never last.
And be among her cloudy trophies hung.
Through the long day its penance did maintain:
And wherefore so ashamed? 'Tis but to atone
Bethink you of the time of night;
And steal from me Maria's prying eye.
In war well-seasoned, and with labours tanned,
And blinkin' Bess of Annandale,
When lovely Titania was far, far away,
And cheers the farmer's gazing brow,
With scorn of man, it little boots to know;
Can't dare the blossom-seeking hand away,
To throw across the garland's silken line
In whose dread name both men and maids are sworn,
I climbed the mountain's height:
For the first time, since he came nigh dead born
Still as I hail thee, thou gloomy December,
Thro' a long life his hopes and wishes crown;
A hand heaven made to succour the distress'd;
And smile and fancy and so pass along;
Thou, Nature, partial Nature! I arraign;
Pride and fame must shadows be?
It never fails, on drinking deep,
Prone to the green head of a misty hill.
Wild thyme, and valley-lilies whiter still
Forgetfulness around me--it shall seem
Nor when reluctantly I took my hat;
The lad that I lo'e dearly, Tam Glen.
"Thou canst not learn, nor can I show,
The Tiber winds, and the broad Ocean laves
How would his highland lug been nobler fir'd,
Of our close voices marry at their birth;
Speaks home to truth and shows it what they are.
Sir Barleycorn's order was purchase and pay.
These pleasant things, and heaven was bedewing
In the prison yard nothing builds, blackbirds or thrushes,
Without one muse's smile, or kind behest,
Will in its clumps lie down, and dust
There'll never be peace till Jamie comes hame!
(Hey, and the rue grows bonnie wi' thyme),
Blind folly's vain and empty lay:
Ye surely hae some warlock-breef
Fair play, he car'd nae deils a boddle.
Poor labour sweet in sleep was locked,
Closer of lovely eyes to lovely dreams,
And 'Let us worship GOD!' he says, with solemn air.
Corbies and Clergy, are a shot right kittle:
Of all she list, strange or magnificent:
Winter's returning song-cloud races cloud.
In solitudes, where no frequented paths
See future wines, rich clust'ring, rise;
To make all bare before he dares to stray
Thus spake the pilgrims o'er this mighty wall
And look through Nature with creative fire;
Cresses that grow where no man may them see,
I stood upon a shore, a pleasant shore,
But where ye feel your honour grip,
And splendour passes for sublime,
Staggering, but stemming all, his Lord unharmed he bears.
Albeit my brow thou never should'st behold,
For Geordie's Jurr we're in disgrace,
Of o'er-head clouds melting the mirror through.
White thorn, wild cherry, and the poplar bare;
But while my crimson currents flow,
He knows the lamest cow and strokes her side
Where the blackbird finds the snails;
With the whisper of heaven's trees
With solemn sound,--and thousand others more,
The weans haud out their fingers laughin
O Kenmure's lads are men, Willie!
Where I see the chimney smokes,
And may none bind my yellow locks
And such too is the grandeur of the dooms
Which they unheeded passed--not dreaming then
Wi' humble prayer to join and share
'Till fears no more had sav'd me:
My heart has been sae fain to see them,
But we hae meat and we can eat,
The troubling spirit of a robber's den.
Could any thing be more alluring,
She tastes unseen; unseen her nimble feet
His gait, is one expression; every limb,
Each one his own anticipated bliss.
All blameless joys on earth we find,
If ye will take that comfort in its truth.
God bless your honours, can ye see't,
If in your bright leaves we would read the fate
That he's the poor man's friend in need,
To laugh, and play, and sing, and loudly call
All close they met, all eyes, before the dusk
Right loath to be of company bereft
The hoary cliffs are crown'd wi' flowers,
As may be read of in Arcadian books;
Stems thronging all around between the swell
Or burst the vanished Hero's lofty mound;
Where Revel calls, and Laughter, vainly loud,
And drinks the stream with vigour fresh;
With uplift hands our foreheads, lowly bending,
Thou foster-child of silence and slow time,
Would pain and care and sickness spare it;
On golden dishes and in baskets bright
Oblige them, patronize their tinsel lays,
But I hae ane will tak' my part,
We drifted o'er the Harbour-bar,
"For that, which comes out of thine eye, doth make
And write their names in his black beuk,
Know there is richest juice in poison-flowers.
And hoards her stores when April showers have fled;
Yet I would have, great gods! but one short hour
Come, in thy raven plumage, night!
With starlight gems: aye, all so huge and strange,
"Or frosty air is keen and still,
And only poet which his leisure knows;
While Europe's eye is fix'd on mighty things,
On thee aft Scotland chows her cood,
Doth more avail than these: the silver flow
Unskaith'd by hunger'd Highland boors;
His shrunken ashes, raise this Dome: How smiles
This stranger ay I pitied. For upon
The cotter listens at his door again,
Tho' mem'ry there my bosom tear;
Then let us cheerfu' acquiesce;
His mind wrapp'd like his mantle, while her eyes
On this side of Jove's clouds, to escape the sight
To follow half on which the eye dilates
Can I forget what charms did once adorn
Who could foresee thee, in a space so brief,
Ah me! what lovely tints are there!
How pleasant on a feather bed to lie,
"At Kilve's smooth shore by the green sea,
The ploughman wished he had a gun to shoot.
And then 'twere pity, but fate's gentle shears
But now his radiant course is run,
Here this night if ye remain;--
Curse on ungrateful man, that can be pleas'd,
That he might see her beauty unespied,
Who stood therein did seem of great renown
Some flowery spot, sequester'd, wild, romantic,
Young Peri of the West!--'tis well for me
His rugged forehead in a mantle pale,
While in a grove I sate reclined,
Close by my mother in their native bowers:
Were ne'er sae welcome to my eye
What more I have to say is short,
To his chamber the monarch is led,
Over the hills at every nightfall went.
Nor did speed hinder converse soft and strange--
A' plump and strapping, in their teens;
Or like the snow falls in the river,
It seem'd he never, never could redeem
Nought more ungentle than the placid look
Bestow'd on your servant, the Poet;
And how she ran, and how she walked,
"Why must such desolation betide
For roads were clad, frae side to side,
Deep lights and shades, bold-mingling, threw
As blooming spring unbends the brow
Thrill the deepest notes of woe.
The scented breezes round us blaw,
In draperies worthy of eternity.
Ere from among some rocks of glittering spar,
Calls for my Spirit's homage, yet it yields
While cow-boys think the day a dream of night,
To such resign the strife for fading Bays--
A flight of bold eagles from Adria's strand:
Leave your work and leave your cot,
Her new-born Numa thou--with reign, alas! too brief.
But he was phrensied, wherefore, who may know?
Who distant burns in flaming torrid climes,
And sleep thegither at the foot,
On things for which no wording can be found;
The buoyant life of song can floating be
Tam skelpit on thro' dub and mire,
To haunt me all the summer long;
Sae bonny blue her een, my dearie;
(For none that knew him need be told)
The hare limp'd trembling through the frozen grass,
May still your mither's heart support ye,
Dissolv'd, or brighter shone, or interwreathed
Almost thy very growth,--to view thee catch
Their footing through the dews; and to him said,
Gude ale hands me bare and busy,
That the first blow is ever half the battle:
And winds drive heavily the beating rain;
Now ev'ry auld wife, greetin', clatters,
The dust thy courser's hoof, rude stranger! spurns around.
Nor shrank from one albeit unworthy thee.
A tight outlandish hizzie, braw
"When the Ivy-tod is heavy with snow,
Pass widow'd nights and joyless days,
The big ha'-Bible, ance his father's pride;
Warring sighs and groans I'll wage thee.
This is the giddy air, and I must spread
That birds, which flew so high, would drop again
Thro' fair, thro' foul, they urge the race,
But Willie's wife is nae sae trig,
The vesper hymn, far swollen, soft and full,
With every morn their love grew tenderer,
Like thee, where shall I find another,
How loudly his sweet voice he rears!
They persecute you all your future days!
Here Justice, from her native skies,
For all the golden bowers of the day
Whyles, on the strong-winged tempest flyin,
I saw the whelming vintage hotly pierce
Alas, he finds them dry; and then he foams,
That may be trees or stacks or clouds
But mean revenge, an' malice fause
As light's a bird upon a thorn.
And in the narrow house o' death
And, even should misfortunes come,
But he has gotten, to our grief,
The world then the love should know
But Merran sat behint their backs,
I am, dear Sir, with zeal most fervent,
He says he is three score and ten,
He gave each damsel's hand so warm a kiss,
The mountain flowers, when his glad senses caught
And then to cut a straw at the brook to have a soak.
In her maternal longing. Happy gloom!
Therefore no lover did of anguish die:
She has an e'e--she has but ane,
And with their legs stroke slumber from their eyes.
Ye'll try the world soon, my lad,
Out-facing Lucifer, and then had hurl'd
It chanced that adverse winds once drove his bark
Far mark'd with the courses of clear, winding rills;
How can we part? Elysium! who art thou?
Oft hast thou seen bolts of the thunder hurl'd
Like to a forest felled by mountain winds;
Come--one bottle more--and have at the sublime!
There shot a golden splendour far and wide,
And for your lawful king, his crown,
There ever bask in uncreated rays,
We took the road ay like a swallow:
Tame on thy finger; to the River-gods,
An' sprung o' great an' noble bluid,
Warm as a dove's nest among summer trees,
And Death was nae less pleas'd wi' Thomas,
And bought my little children bread,
At last I saw the ocean, a pleasing sight to me:
And where these are light Eros finds a feere;
Such hours 'gainst years of life,--say, would he name threescore?
Her looks are like the vernal May,
Tis eight o'clock,--a clear March night,
They hung him up before the storm.
Of a wide outlet, fathomless and dim
Hear the woodlark charm the forest,
Over the solitary hills he fared,
But oh, Eliza, hear one prayer--
Saying, Go on, thou shadow, and let the sun shine.
Of holier love. Nor wilt thou then forget,
_Horn_ sent her aff to her lang hame,
Even in the peaceful rural vale,
All that gay Beauty from her bondsmen claims:
When it puckered up with shame,
The winter chill on his cold bed receives
Fear's moment ague quakes the blood,
There standing fierce beneath, he stampt his foot,
Thro' ilka bore the beams were glancing;
With April's tender younglings: next, well trimm'd,
Hung over her sweet Basil evermore,
An' they maun starve o' cauld and hunger;
Conceited gowk! puff'd up wi' windy pride!--
We'll hide the cooper behind the door,
That I should get sic exaltation,
O, these are my lassie's all-conquering charms!
Roused up to too much wrath which follows o'ergrown fears?
The God, dove-footed, glided silently
Of Jove--Minerva's start--no bosom shook
Whereat, methought, the lidless-eyed train
When 'twas their plan to coax her by degrees
She pray'd, her wither'd hand uprearing,
Then hide their heads beneath the clothes,
Her cheeks are like yon crimson gem,
Perks up its head the hiding grass between,--
He stept upon his shepherd throne: the look
(Hey, and the rue grows bonnie wi' thyme),
All saints to give him sight of Madeline,
And seek me out a home by a remoter sea,
To gie the lad that has the land;
Now, sir, if ye hae friends enow,
They could not in the self-same mansion dwell
The dazzling sun-rise: two sisters sweet
Enthron'd in her een he delivers his law:
Glance but one little beam of temper'd light
He, down the water, gies him this guid-e'en:--
And duck about, and try to lose their fears,
A scent of violets, and blossoming limes,
Your hurdies like a distant hill,
Dame Justice fu' brawlie has sped,
Nor be the trumpet heard! O vain, O vain;
Kinder than polished slaves though not so bland,
And shadowy, through the mist of passed years:
How wisdom and folly meet, mix, and unite;
But ay keep mind to moop an' mell
When blest to-day, unmindful of to-morrow.
Spangling those million poutings of the brine
When ranting round in pleasure's ring,
Nodding about their gold and yellow locks
Still he beheld, nor mingled with the throng;
Fresh breezes, bowery lawns, and innocent floods,
From the grey peeling willow as idlers do,
Which thunders down with headlong force,
Kissing his feet with murmurs; and the Wood,
Pure as the ice-drop that froze on the mountain?
Her lips still as she fragrant breath'd,
He should been tight that daur't to raize thee,
In which life's sordid being hath no part.
While yet the summer-leaves were green,
Each Palikar his sabre from him cast,
There, where a sceptr'd Pictish shade
While birds warble welcome in ilka green shaw;
The city won for Allah from the Giaour
For prodigal, thriftless, bestowing,
And so your servant: gloomy Master Poet!
The hoarse jay screams to see her out so soon,
Tho' rigid law cries out, 'twas just!
Defies the power which crushed thy temples gone:
He springs, that bends until they touch the ground.
An' aft your moss-traversing spunkies
Thus, resign'd and quiet, creep
While thus of both bereft, the Nymph-Queen doubly sighed.
Sir, in that circle you are nam'd;
But the host stopt to hint when he'd ordered the dray
Thy fanes, thy temples to thy surface bow,
To act and suffer, but remount at last
We wander out we know not where,
Where spreading hawthorns gaily bloom!
When Death's dark stream I ferry o'er,
No further than to where his feet had stray'd,
Arches of evergreen that scarce let through
There's no a heart in a' the land,
To its idolatries a patient knee,
They pain my sad bosom, sae sweetly they blaw,
Look'd up: a conflicting of shame and ruth
But sneer na British Boys awa',
His house, his home, his heritage, his lands,
And there by zephyrs, streams, and birds, and bees,
That curst magician's name fell icy numb
In midst of all, there lay a sleeping youth
For there will be bickerin' there;
Bowed to the inborn tyranny of years?
Then, once again, the charmed God began
I know her heart will never change,
Crystalline brother of the belt of heaven,
Who sin and tell us love can die.
Ilk hoary hunter mourn'd a brither;
And say that fate is mine, love.
To mind the Kirk and State affairs:
Where Porphyro took covert, pleas'd amain.
To dull the nice remembrance of my home?
Like to the apples on the Dead Sea's shore,
And as its flowers their sweets display
A limpin' leg, a hand-breed shorter;
And his drooped head sinks gradually low--
"Of brownys and of bogilis full is this buke."
The cheerfu' supper done, wi' serious face,
Hailing the setting sun, sweet, in the green thorn bush:
Cross the seas and win his ain.
Pale grew her immortality, for woe
Her arms as one who prophesied.--At length
A scowl is sometimes on his brow, but who
For as Apollo each eve doth devise
But with a frater-feeling strong,
When all the birds are faint with the hot sun,
He'll gabble rhyme, nor sing nae mair,
And I hae tint my dearest dear;
When upward-springing, blythe, to greet
He plays with other boys when work is done,
To double uses they the hours convert,
To look on nature, not as in the hour
On the smooth shore the night-fires brightly blazed,
The mite high Heaven bestow'd, that mite with thee I'll share.
Rusty airn caps and jinglin' jackets,
Of unremembered pleasure; such, perhaps,
Which ties thee to thy tyrants; and thy lot
I left the lads and lasses, the labour and the tillage;
Wha drudge and drive thro' wet an' dry,
Sculdudd'ry an' he will be there,
That thou hast been a witness--it must be--
Another, bending o'er her nimble tread,
The deuce gae wi'm, to believe me!
Beside a brook in mossy forest-dell
and every sunday goes upstairs to cry
Each following whirls the shadow of the last;
There's wit there, ye'll get there,
The herds an' hissels were alarm'd:
Over the pathless waves towards him bows.
But could not to my memory wake it back,
And I will flit into it with my lyre,
There was a lad that follow'd her,
And, happy melodist, unwearied,
He's danc'd awa wi' the Exciseman.
O thou could'st foster me beyond the brink
And how, when met with unawares,
But still be true 'till I am dead,
Thy mossy footstool shall the altar be
The tears into his eyes were brought,
Nor dares she go to bed until the tempest drops.
Then wi' a rhyme or song he lash't 'em,
From these our interviews, in which I steal
That when I loved him not I cannot say.
Frost shoots his needles by the small dyke side,
Perverse, with stronger fancy to reclaim
Couldn't bear the buzzing of a fly;
From off its nest hid in the grasses rank,
I took the oars: the Pilot's boy,
When heavy dragg'd wi' pine an' grievin';
And what we, ignorantly, sheet-lightning call,
Gaen in a gallopin' consumption,
Well met from far with revelry secure,
This leads me on, to tell for sport,
Rantin' rovin', rantin' rovin';
A British ship I waked, as from a trance restored.
The sweet-scented birk shades my Mary and me.
Beneath yon mountain's ever beauteous brow:
Or Phineas  drove the murdering blade,
More thought than woe was in her dusky face,
On each side of my chair, and make me learn
He drives the crowd and follows at their heels
Robs not one light seed from the feather'd grass,
Anxious as hind towards her hidden fawn.
And plung'd all noiseless into the deep night.
I've nane in female servan' station,
He gaped wide but naething spak--
Twa sage philosophers to glimpse on;
As healthy sheep as you might see,
Had he then wrong'd a heart where sorrow kept?
Her hair was like the links o' gowd,
And with the larger wove in small intricacies.
How pleasant thy banks and green valleys below,
Stunn'd by that loud and dreadful sound,
Thou man of crazy care and ceaseless sigh,
"If he may know which way to go,
And the sweet clothing of the maple tree.
Sings there, and dances, in mad-hearted pranks;
Though with their grace I was not oversmitten,
Our friends will all be there from nigh and far.
Thou seem'dst my sister: hand in hand we went
And of thy seasons be a careful nurse."--
Something in ilka part o' thee,
All underneath the birchen shade;
And, horror! kiss'd his own--he was alone.
Like blood-drops from my heart they dropp'd.
His hand, but broke his scythe, there is a power
Forms from the floating wreck which Ruin leaves behind:
They change--as well give age the glass
The call's more urgent when he journeys slow.
By Nemesis, I see my spirit flit
In water, earth, or air, but poesy.
Low bows his head when Jesus meets his ears,
When thy gold breath is misting in the west,
Or read fresh volumes we've not seen before,
Or, trouth! ye'll stain the mitre
Ye maukins whiddin thro' the glade,
For one so weak to venture his poor verse
'Gainst poor Excisemen? give the cause a hearing;
And many a tower for some fair mischief won,
"Haud aff your hands, young man," she says,
The hoary sire--the mortal stroke,
And doomed him to the zealot's ready Hell,
This night his weekly moil is at an end,
Thou treacherous medicine, reckoned pure,
Of one fair palace, that far far surpass'd,
He loved the brook's soft sound,
To some black cloud; thence down I'll madly sweep
Can gladness bring again to me.
The ploughman he's a bonnie lad,
Who strive therefore: on the sudden it is won.
From your breast houseless: ay, it must be so."
Whose strings touch'd by thy fingers, all the vast
The end and aim of Poesy. 'Tis clear
As wise as Solomon they read the news,
Savour of poisonous brass and metal sick:
I've even join'd the honour'd jorum,
She smiled at these, but shook her head and sighed
And sheathed with an invulnerable mind,
Hard is thy heart, Lord Gregory,
And asketh where the golden apples grow:
He'll have them by fair trade, if not, he will smuggle;
Since every thing that meets our foolish eyes
The lass that made the bed to me.
To plough and sow, to reap and mow,
But then there came a sight of joy;
Into the blue of heaven. He'll be shent,
Unus'd to bend, by hard compulsion bent
Or ere the jealous Queens of Nations greet,
And sairly thole their mither's ban
The widows, wives, an' a' may bless him,
Familiar with these songs, that with the night
And all the autumn 'twas his only play
And in the fire throws the sheath;
Fair and faultless as your own,
The bonnie blink o' Mary's e'e!
Here lies, now a prey to insulting neglect,
Here some are thinkin' on their sins,
Droop faintly, and so sicken for thine end,
I wad nae mind it, no that spittle
Or hounded forth, dishonour arms
But cold successive noontide blasts
For joy he cannot hold the bridle,
While to his lady meek the Carian turn'd,
The old fox hears the noise and drops the goose.
The Forum, where the immortal accents glow,
What a strange scene before us now does run--
Wore it quite out ere others took the place,
Stretches, with all its mist and cloudy rack,
Was now his lot. And must he patient stay,
Than Egypt's river:--from that gentle side
Though better speed was urged by the clown--
'Tis said, a child was in her womb,
"And they answer'd not our cheer.
O Solitude! if I must with thee dwell,
As once on Pisgah purg'd was the sight
Flush'd were their cheeks, and bright eyes double bright:
There ruminate, with sober thought,
Fair dewy roses brush against our faces,
It came to pass, that when he did address
His locked, letter'd, braw brass collar
Of all this unintelligible world
By high-way side forgetful would I sit
Nodding above; behold black Acheron!
Wilt thou wi' me tent the flocks?
Full many shapes, that shadows were,
All like a silent horseman-ghost,
I tint my curch, and baith my shoon;
And eaten like a wether-haggis?
Of this in heaven: I have mark'd each cheek,
On her own couch, new made of flower leaves,
Oh Stamboul! once the Empress of their reign?
It's no I like to sit an' swallow,
Cornwallis fought as lang's he dought,
How she might find the clay, so dearly prized,
Do smile upon the evening of my days:
Of these, thy brethren and the Goddesses!
Wi' hand on hainch, an' upward e'e,
And you, ye twinkling starnies bright,
"Yet, all beneath the unrivall'd rose,
The grunt of hogs freed from their nightly dens
The auld gudeman o' London court,
The first long kiss, warm firstling, to renew
Tarbolton, twenty-fourth o' June,
And buried Learning rose, redeemed to a new Morn.
Explore at large man's infant race,
So noiseless, and he never thought to know.
Which seemed to him more lone than Eremite's sad cell.
And other voices speak, and other sights surround.
Then ergo, she'll match them, and match them always.
They're gold in value, though they're cheap to you.
Wi' rhymes weel-turn'd and ready,
What dost thou in that mansion fair?--
For tasting joys like these, sure I should be
Insect and bird and tree and flower--
And they had found Lorenzo's earthy bed;
My children fair, my lovely girls and boys!
That HE, who stills the raven's clam'rous nest,
Whose agonies are evils of a day--
Not long delay'd, that scar'd the younger Gods
"While ye are pleas'd to keep me hale,
The grass you almost hear it growing,
Shall ever daunton me, or awe me,
Than kingly robes, than crowns and globes,
Since upon night so sweet such awful morn could rise!
Yet others rapt in pleasure seem,
Are sweeter; therefore, ye soft pipes, play on;
By the melancholy corners of that mouth.
He ceased--she panted quick--and suddenly
I could not see a single thing,
His teeth they chatter, chatter still.
At last he said: "Poor lady, how thus long
Nor feels as Lovers o'er the dust they loved;
Gone, gone are rapture's flooding gushes!
The creeper, mellowing for an autumn blush;
Far, far from thee, I wander here;
Undying Love's, who here ascends a throne
With a fresh pinion; which I feel to spring,
But, oh! I fear the kintra soon
The ploughman goes by, I grow bold;
Printed their footsteps to the very door,
Surely I dreamt to-day, or did I see
Accept the gift;--tho' humble he who gives,
And passing neighbours crossed the street, to tell
The yoke that is upon us doubly bowed,
"We cannot bid the ear be still;
And Murder, by the ghastly gleam, and Rape
Scanning the motley scene that varies round;
The plighted husband of her youth!
Deep in its fountain, lest it overboil
The clock gives warning for eleven;
If I do hide myself, it sure shall be
In a mossy stone, that sometimes was my seat,
His gear may buy him glens and knowes;
Descried an orbed diamond, set to fray
Or else, I fear some ill ane skelp him,
Bearing upon their scaly backs, in files,
He felt the fulness of Satiety:
This Hermit good lives in that wood
Lay vast and edgeways; like a dismal cirque
That tho' some by the skirt may try to snatch him,
Here's a health to ane I lo'e dear;
Lest I should miss to bid thee a good morrow
As fast as loaded moths can fly:
To leave some fragment of itself behind.
Would they had never been, or were to come!
What leagues are lost, before the dawn of day,
The wet day prints it full of rings.
"Why William, sit you thus alone,
Had played upon my heels: I was light-hearted,
The spell should break of this protracted dream.
Will not some say that I presumptuously
But Jessy's lovely hand in mine,
Even to swooning, why ye, Divinities,
So once more days and nights aid me along,
Where laughing love sae wanton swims.
'Till wrenched of every stay but Heav'n,
Of admonitions to the winds and seas,
Of dissolute tongues, 'gainst jealousy, and hate,
Such a patter the gravel did make.
Where the flower in green darkness buds, blossoms, and fades,
Till my flesh, blood, and marrow was turned to dry bone.
Look'd down on him with pity, and the voice
All gather'd in the dewy morning: hie
Life is not worth having with all it can give--
But soon wi' sounding victorie,
Half-hidden, like a mermaid in sea-weed,
Son of the Morning, rise! approach you here!
Half-ignorant, they turn'd an easy wheel,
And Otway, Radcliffe, Schiller, Shakespeare's art,
And when they on their father call,
Lie still, my son, the mother said,
She made the bed baith large and wide,
Made their cheeks paler by the break of June:
Which pined although it spoke not, and grew keen,
How tremulous-dazzlingly the wheels sweep
'Tis but the same rehearsal of the past,
Even Sir, by them your heart's esteem'd,
Ah, yes! much more would start into his sight--
The Cross descends, thy Minarets arise,
Through which all things grow phantoms; and the cloud
In through the woven roof, and fluttering-wise
And where I often when a child for hours
An' snugly sit among the saunts
Of something far more deeply interfused,
Spirits in grief, lift up your heads, and smile;
We are such forest-trees, and our fair boughs
My very thoughts: in mercy then away,
Well thou know'st my aching heart--
Such as ay muster where grey time has scoop'd
Lift up their heads, as still the whisper pass'd.
That happy time all past and gone,
An' kirsen him wi' reekin' water;
Imperial Anarchs, doubling human woes!
To him be given to ken the heaven
To sing auld Coil in nobler style,
That auld man shall never daunton me.
Wha, as it pleases best thysel',
That fenced the haystack, and the remnant shines
Than ours, a friend to man, to whom thou say'st,
Gaunt, wither'd, sapless, feeble, cramp'd, and lame.
As hard as lips can make it: till agreed,
Shall no longer appear in the records of fame;
Owre blate to seek, owre proud to snool,
On either side; pitying the sad death
Her head was serpent, but ah, bitter-sweet!
Can blazon evil deeds, or consecrate a crime.
They heat your brains, and fire your veins,
Engulph for ever. "Stay!" he cried, "ah, stay!
And in a voice of solemn joy, that aw'd
Bestride your steed while cold is in the skies.
Ye hae your Meg your dearest part,
Or still the tumult of the raging sea:
Ghaist nor bogle shalt thou fear;
And robins hollo "tut" and fly away.
Does the train-attended carriage
Groan'd one and all, as if some piercing trial
A breeze, most softly lulling to my soul;
Her dove had been a Highland laddie,
The flashing elements of female souls.
Mingle its crimpled leaves with furze and ling,
Ah! then and there was hurrying to and fro--
The bee kissed and went singing by,
Oceanus, and Tethys, in whose lap
Of the sweets of Fairies, Peris, Goddesses,
Young goddess! let me see my native bowers!
He went complaining all the morrow
I roam in pleasant darkness, more unseen
How ill exchang'd for riper times,
That she no loss may mourn. And now the wind
The wanton coot the water skims,
My pen I here fling to the door,
"Behold! behold, the palace of his pride!
They heard the blackbird's sang, man;
Vain thought! yet be as now thou art,
Nae man can tether time or tide;
The little flowers felt his pleasant sighs
In spite o' dark banditti stabs
O whiskey! soul o' plays an' pranks!
God must be friend and father both,
He rose in silence, and once more 'gan fare
Another multitude. Whereat more quick
Tho' he was bred to kintra wark,
Where are its golden roofs?  where those who dared to build?
And I sigh as my heart it wad burst in my breast.
But hath a part of Being, and a sense
Which, O heavens! I should see,
To bless his filial little flock
Some gentle Spirit still pervades the spot,
The sacred lowe o' weel-plac'd love,
And start and snap at blackbirds bouncing bye
Upon the molehill's little lap,
Now Paphian girls were known to sing and smile;
The crystal waters round us fa',
Ah, happy child! thou mak'st me sigh,
That farther up the stem is smoother seen,
Of delicate birch trees, or long grass which hems
Do not those curls of glossy jet surpass
And handfuls got of rose and lambtoe sweet,
A pleasure in the dimness of the stars.
And vow'd for my love, he was dying;
Sick hearted, weary--so I took a whim
and he with this and goody Thompson sends
And as he went she chanted merrily.
They snool me sair, and haud me down,
Ye powers that smile on virtuous love,
Which the great Founder sucked from thy wild teat,
'Tis to the worship of the solemn Horn,
But crimes that scorn the tender voice of ruth,
Sweet solitude, what joy to be alone--
Wherever nature led; more like a man
Emprison'd in black, purgatorial rails:
His sad complaining dowie raves.
But I forget.--My Pilgrim's shrine is won,
Spare me thy vengeance, Galloway,
And by that stoup, my faith and houp,
Mission'd her viewless servants to enrich
Before the serene father of them all
In all the house was heard no human sound.
Adown my beard the slavers trickle!
"Say quick," quoth he, "I bid thee say
God knows, I'm no the thing I shou'd be,
And oddling crow in idle motions swing
I'll hide the struggle in my heart,
Who read for me the sonnet swelling loudly
Till words themselves grow sick with praise
"Why do you think?" return'd she tenderly:
The pride, the pleasure o' the wood,
And saw around me the wide field revive
She is so constant to me, and so kind:
The lintwhites in the hazel braes,
The Simmer joys the flocks to follow;
Fit for the silv'ring of a seraph's dream;
Of joys; and she began to moan and sigh
Enough to warm her for three days.
"To those who love us!"--second fill;
The Lalland laws he held in scorn;
My Anna, summer laughs in mirth,
Strange pangs would flash along Childe Harold's brow,
And limpid brook that leaps along,
What have I done of all the year,
Oft show the tenants needing safer sheds:
Her charming syllables, till indistinct
There's themes enough in Caledonian story,
For very joy it used to grieve us;
Ere he his unseen pomp would solemnize.
Th' unmanner'd dust might soil his star;
There to abide with my Creator, GOD,
Or wherefore comes that knight so proudly by?
But, as daily bread is all I need,
Full in the smile of the blue firmament.
Than those whereof such things the Bard relates,
See you not yon hills and dales,
Will lay and raise its brood unseen.
He cannot see the heavens, nor the flow
Who keepeth clos'd a wond'rous riddle-book,
Nor bleed these patriots with their country's wounds:
Lifted to the white clouds. Therefore should I
O did he ever live, that lonely man,
"Endymion! the cave is secreter
Against all doublings, and will keep alive
That's fair behind, and fair before;
Those that would the bloom devour,
And speak not one pale word, and sigh no more.
Save of blown self-applause, they proudly mount
And hazels thick, dark-stemm'd beneath the shade:
With human hearts--to what?--a dream alone.
And with a mother's fears shrinks at the rocking blast!
The picture of good health she goes along,
Now filtering winds thin winnow through the woods
And Robin that should come at e'en--
Of those same fragrant exhalations bred,
O'er its soft bed of verdure. All is still,
In crowded streets flowers never grew,
Peruse them, an' return them quickly,
Widened a little, as when Zephyr bids
Through the green evening quiet in the sun,
I could no more--askance the creature eyeing,
And a bottle like this, are my glory and care.
While I am striving how to fill my heart
The double night of ages, and of her,
Till order bright completely shine,
Frae God's ain priests the people's hearts
Gurgles through straiten'd banks, and still doth fan
The sky is changed!--and such a change! Oh Night,
"Tho' I should wander terra e'er,
Wi' nae converse but Gallowa' bodies,
An Earthquake  reeled unheededly away!
No longer the warfare, ungodly, would wage;
Amang the trees, where humming bees
E'en let them die--for that they're born,
I scarce could wink or see a styme;
While its low nest, moist with the dews of morn,
Vexing conceptions of some sudden change;
And welcome in the blooming year!
My uncertain path with green, that I may speed
And late or early never grumbled?--
Tis for the murder-aiming gleed
The Pythian hymn with more than mortal fire,
The little bents with reedy head,
That he at Lon'on, frae ane Adams got;
Fearing to move or speak, she look'd so dreamingly.
Salt tears were coming, when I heard my name
Hark, injur'd Want recounts th' unlisten'd tale,
That I must suffer, lingering slow.
The bulldog knows his match and waxes cold,
And his tremendous hand is grasping it,
So passionately bright, my dazzled soul
And golden keel'd, is left unlaunch'd and dry.
An' ay the less they hae to sturt them,
Now thou's left thy lass for ay--
Why desert ye your auld native shire?
Your father, he may tie your locks
Equal to judge--you're candid to forgive.
From thy blue throne, now filling all the air,
In which a spirit new come from the skies
Of higher occupants, a richer zest,
My lady's dink, my lady's drest,
As she was wont, th' imagination
Whose care it is to guard a thousand flocks:
It was a den where no insulting light
Stills the huge swells. Then ebb the mighty heaves,
Here shall the shepherd make his seat,
The child of Love!  though born in bitterness,
The wrong'd Libert as,--who has told you stories
He had a wife was dour and din,
An' paitricks scraichin' loud at e'en,
Before St. Mark still glow his Steeds of brass,
And Thurlow growl a curse of woe;
But sure as three times three mak nine,
Be Britain still to Britain true,
And fellow-countrymen have stood aloof--
Their Phlegethon, curls round the rocks of jet
From all I meet, or hear, or see:
Ruins of years--though few, yet full of fate:--
My mind with many a form which aptly seems
But I'll remember thee, Glencairn,
And spreaded tail, a vulture could not glide
Straight homeward to their symbol-essences;
The neatherd boy that used to tend the cows,
To the broad column which rolls on, and shows
And he his namesake, whose oft-baffled foes
A fate more pleasing, a delight more true
Thy lengthen'd days on this blest morrow,
Let my foes choke, and my friends shout afar,
Of heroes; and, as looking at the sun,
Its brilliant hues with all their beams unshorn:
Still, neighbours prize him as the learned man.
And when my weakness most relied
An' now the sin keeks in the west,
Gush'd with more pride than do a wretch's tears?--
Since we went out together for the last,
Lay dormant, mov'd convuls'd and gradually
Long have I sought for rest, and, unaware,
Yet once more let us look upon the Sea;
As if the ministring stars kept not apart,
That is the thing you ne'er shall see;
And, like a muddy stream, would bear along
To reach their native kindred skies,
The larch trees, like the colour of the Sun;
O' guid advisement comes nae ill.
No other sound succeeds; but ceasing here,
Down Lowrie's burn he took a turn,
To think how mony counsels sweet,
And know'st them gathered by the Rhine,
The dew-drops feed them not--they love the shine
To me more dear, congenial to my heart,
And oh, her widow'd heart is sair,
Heaven send your heart-strings ay in tune,
"What you have heard, what you have seen,
A midge, if in their road a-bed,
Twas when you stole my maidenhead;
The thought that cheers this heart of mine
Will quickly meet the ground agen;
Listening, the doors an' winnocks rattle,
And then his auld brass will buy me a new pan.
Time's sweet first-fruits--they danc'd to weariness,
While here, half-mad, half-fed, half-sarkit,
And I have told thee all thou mayest hear.
Of nymphs in woods, and fountains; and the shade
Where at moonshine midnight hours,
Rich is the tribute of the grateful mind.
And Passion's host, that never brooked control:
May taunt you wi' his jeers an' mocks;
Let minstrels sweep the skilfu' string
Told of his rage, ere he thus sank and pined.
If the sun wakens first in the morn
And from her own pure self no joy dissembling,
Again I'll linger in a sloping mead
Came, as through bubbling honey, for Love's sake,
Or mould'ring ruins mark the sacred fane.
Fantastically tangled: the green hills
The mightiest of the storms hath ta'en his stand:
The soupe their only hawkie does afford,
I might, by this hae led a market,
Many and many a verse I hope to write,
Who sin and tell us love can die,
That leaves a bit of wool behind,
Mild-chequering thro' the trees,
And aiblins gowd and honour baith
Was made his wedded wife yestreen;
Brightening the half veil'd face of heaven afar:
The breath which made him wretched; yet he knew
The little boy lets home-close nesting go,
Yellow leaves the woodlands strowing,
Girt with the silent crimes of Capitals,
To keep the Highland hounds in sight;
Where, where is love's fond, tender throe,
And when ye wing your annual way
He shall have at my cost a full pitcher or two.
Thou canst not ask me with thee here to roam
Nations have armed in madness--the strange fate
Of heaven is half undrawn--within the pale
Ye've gave to me a broken heart,
Heaven gives its favourites --early death--yet shed
Her faithfu' mate will share her toil,
Thou minds me o' departed joys,
When frae my mither's womb I fell,
"The Game is done! I've won, I've won!"
We dance before him thorough kingdoms wide:--
That grieves me worst of all.--
But this is human life: the war, the deeds,
When all was darkened, with Etnean throe
The very music of the name has gone
Of thoughtless youth, but hearing oftentimes
Childe Harold had a mother--not forgot,
Come, let me take thee to my breast,
And pockets tops and taws, where daisies bloom,
But thee, what were our fairs an' rants?
How pale and wan it else would be.
Nimbles with timid dread beneath the swath;
And tells her name to every flower;
So thou, dear bird, young Jeany fair,
Nor count its loss, for mine annoy,
It has a glory, and nought else can share it:
She owneth none that owned them all
In happy silence, like the clear meander
And yet can starve the author of the pleasure!
And servile knees to Thrones? No! _prove_ before ye praise!
The mavis wild wi' mony a note,
Tempt me no more with rosy cheeks,
Nor daze my reason with bright eyes;
And smiles at winter be it eer so keen
With recollected music, though the tone
Ye aiblins might--I dinna ken--
His quick gone love, among fair blossom'd boughs,
While care my heart is wringing.
And taste the music of that vision pale.
All, all was seized, and weeping, side by side,
The haunt of river-Nymph, to gaze and lave
And must I think it!--is she gone,
Poor Willie, wi' his bow-kail runt,
Although no deeper Moralist rehearse
To Jove's high throne, and by her plainings drew
Or why regard the passing year?
Yea, every one attend! for in good truth
With that controlling pow'r assist ev'n me
Which will oblige your humble debtor,
An' bear them to my master dear.
Of Love, Romance, Devotion is his lay,
Wi' tentie care I'll flit thy tether,
Where moss did into cushions spring,
The enchantment that afterwards befel?
And some in dreams assured were
The hoary morns precede the sunny days,
Out-sparkling sudden like an upturn'd gem,
By one consuming flame: it doth immerse
Had found him sleeping, and supplied his place.
For sceptred Cynics Earth were far too wide a den.
If such there were--with _you_, the Moral of his Strain.
The hills whence classic Yarrow flows,
Entering with every step he took through many a scene.
The Cricket's song, in warmth increasing ever,
And tumbler-like are bobbing there,
Then in a silken scarf,--sweet with the dews
Who had not from mid-life to utmost age
That keeps us from yon heaven which woos us to its brink.
Here's a health to Charlie the chief of the clan,
Storms upon storms in quick succession crowd,
And left me tossing safely. But the crown
But thus unlaurelled to descend in vain,
Grim loon! he got me by the fecket,
But lang or noon, loud tempests storming,
Of Eve's first fire he has a cinder;
The beauty still more beauteous. Nor, that time,
His destiny, alert he stood: but when
As on the brier the budding rose
Time writes no wrinkle on thine azure brow--
In fearless yet in aching ignorance?
His sweetheart's love in cotton gown.
So sung the bard--and Nansie's wa's
Where are the forms the sculptor's soul hath seized?
They did his measures thraw, man,
Turn'd from the bridegroom's door.
With shatter'd boat, oar snapt, and canvass rent,
If ye'll gie Hughie Graham to me.
Such as would lull a listening child to sleep,
For all beside are sophists--from thy thrift,
Couched in thy brightness, dream of fields divine:
To rattle the thundering drum was his trade;
Had Lycius liv'd to hand his story down,
Till lost in inward vision, with wet eye
O' nice education but sma' is her share;
And now the thought torments her sore,
But that is fancy--for the Starlight dews
He loves to talk with Marineres
In every other circumstance, the mind
On that low thatched cottage stop,
Grace, beauty, and elegance fetter her lover,
While each to his great father bends,
Listening to the ushering charms,
That spread a wilderness indeed;
His breast is dancing on the restless sea.
Within its pearly house.--The mighty deeps,
I, here wha sit, hae met wi' some,
Pointed each fringed lash; the smeared loam
New sudden things, nor casts his mental slough?
But this none knew, nor haply cared to know;
When gleaming sunbeams intervene,
Their cradling arms, and purpos'd to convey
My life was ance that careless stream,
Ye dainty Deacons and ye douce Conveeners,
But if (which pow'rs above prevent)
Dubious to trust where Treachery might lurk:
For wi' the roke she wad him knock.
Now tired with wandering, haud awa hame;
Had made a miry channel for his tears.
Set up a face, how I stop short,
Who walks not in the wicked's way,
The Sun had sunk behind vast Tomerit,
Thro' a' the toun she trotted by him;
And all my frowsy couch in sorrow steep;
"Ae hairst afore the Sherra-moor,
Your proffer o' luve's an airl-penny,
They mov'd in tracks of shining white;
Then hiltie skiltie, we gae scrievin',
Of words at opening a portfolio.
Pitying the propless climber of mankind,
At Venus' temple porch, 'mid baskets heap'd
Whom his ain son o' life bereft,
Or canst thou break that heart of his,
And while her mind was fighting thus,
O Meikle thinks my luve o' my beauty,
When light and sunbeams, warm and kind,
And then his tongue with sober seemlihed
Plashy sleets and beating rain!
No shape distinguishable, more than when
Here will I weep in peace, (so fancy wrought,)
A worshipper of Nature, hither came,
If Isabel's quick eye had not been wed
And there, is beauty's blossom."
In hunting the wicked lieutenant;
The Spring is come, and Spring flowers coming too,
That lie between us and our hame,
His clean hearth-stane, his thriftie Wifie's smile,
And he shone bright, and on the right
My hopes of being remembered in my line
The impatient mariner the sail unfurl'd,
Thou small, but favoured spot of holy ground!
An auld man shall never daunton me.
Where I swaggered like a man though I was not half so big,
The god of the bottle sends down from his hall--
Each richer by his being a murderer.
No bigger than an unobserved star,
My dearest bluid, to do them guid,
Wi' you I'll scarce gang ony where--
May powers aboon unite you soon,
Am I, that thou may'st plainly see how far
Or some curmurring in his guts,
"Together round her grave we played,
Scots, wha hae wi' Wallace bled,
Now coldly given, now utterly refused,
The sharin't with Montgomery's Peggy.
With streams that deepen freshly into bowers.
An' thy auld hide as white's a daisy,
She stares the daddy in her face,
Came forth, and in perfumed leafits spread.
And mony a huntit, poor red-coat,
And still the second dread command be free,
Nor feel the heart can never all grow old?
No hollow tree or woodland bower
To waste on sluggish hulks the sweetest breeze!
Another night, and not my passion shrive.
That has no present joys to hear.
Bounds with one lashing spring the mighty brute,
An' bleak December's winds ensuin',
For prey, a' holes an' corners tryin;
Willow switches I broke and peeled bits of straws,
"But what's the thorn? and what's the pond?
And Johnny's lips they burr, burr, burr,
Must wring my soul, ere Phoebus, low,
Old Eolus would stifle his mad spleen,
Ravage was made, for which no knell was heard.
I leave the tyrant and the slave,
And when his love for earth begun
Forth creeping imagery of slighter trees,
That whetstone of the teeth--Monotony in wire!
O think how this dry palate would rejoice!
Could artful numbers move thee,
To feast them there, stained with the purple dye;
O why should fate sic pleasure have,
"Good Susan tell me, and I'll stay;
Spenser! thy brows are arched, open, kind,
'Twill make the widow's heart to sing,
Of a' the trades that I do ken,
And all things weighed in Custom's falsest scale;
I've lost but ane, I've twa behin',
They mind me o' Nannie--and Nanny's awa!
But here my fancy's moods admire
Unsceptred; and his realmless eyes were closed;
Doth not weary? Where's the face
Gi' him the schoolin' o' your weans,
By me should gratefully be ware;
Through winding passages, where sameness breeds
Her fearful sobs, self-folding like a flower
What mark is so fair as the breast of a foe?
Such as an army's baffled strength delays,
An' a' the lang night as happy's a king.
With thee into the ken of heavenly powers,
Conscious the bounteous meed they well deserve,
Her eyes were fair, and very fair,
Made the earth wet, and turned the unwilling waters red.
The hogshead rolled forward, the toper fell back,
And track to his covert the captive on shore.
At brim of day-tide, on some grassy lea,
Is murdered for its shining coat,
Which the glad setting sun, in gold doth dress;
Shalt beauteous blaze upon the day,
Is there, in human form, that bears a heart--
No tide of the Baltic e'er drunker than he.
Took happy flights. Who shall his fame impair
He lived and died among the savage men.
And that of all things 'tis kept secretest.
And soon his sheep are got in other grounds--
And it hath furrow'd that large front: yet now,
A lay that once I saw her hand awake,
Ere it burst open swift as fairy thought,
By the old tavern door on the causey there lay
He'd up the back-stairs, and by G--he would steal 'em.
The scared, hoarse raven on its cradle croaks,
And sundry signatures adorn the roll,
In music, through the vales of Thessaly:
The brightest sun, the bluest sky,
They first crowned wilderness and rock,
No peace, no comfort could I find,
And tho' your fathers, prodigal of life,
Guess were the jaunty streams refresh themselves.
Resides a sweet lassie, my thought and my dream.
And sailing pinions.--Upon such a shrine
By the mole hill swelling there;
When bending down wi' auld gray hairs,
Each like a dove leaving its olive perch,
O, gear will buy me rigs o' land,
The furrows of long thought, and dried-up tears,
That from the hatchet can repose,
And moan forth witless words with many a sigh;
A thousand hearts beat happily; and when
For loyal Forbes' charter'd boast,
Meantime, on shady levels, mossy fine,
Poor old Leoni!--Angels rest his soul!
The Catrine woods were yellow seen,
Receive the fiery Frank, her former guest;
Till she is tired, let Betty Foy
When idly goavan whyles we saunter
And once more, in claret, try which was the man.
As from each barn the lumping flail rebounds
I feel my heart is cut in twain for them."
But fickle fortune frowns on me,
Is my soul's pleasure; and it sure must be
Or the stormy north sends driving forth
And foul, or fair, or dark the night,
A patient watch over the stream that creeps
But, och! mankind are unco weak,
Nae langer rev'rend men, their country's glory,
Tamed to her cage, nor feels a wish to rove:
Bears the cloud onwards: in that Tale I find
And all the Muse's tales seem truly told,
Ethereal for pleasure; 'bove his head
The ponderous syllables, like sullen waves
To take your trundle as ye used to be;
Her cheeks like lilies dipt in wine,
Will turn thy very rouge to deadly pale;
For e'en and morn, she cries, alas!
If he could hear his lady's matin-song,
E'en now all tumult from my bosom fades:
O let me see our land retain her soul,
My garden, stored with pease, and mint, and thyme,
Affrighted, kept her still, and let him pass
The lawns, wood-fring'd in Nature's native taste;
Where those eyes are the brightest far that keep
Thus spake he, and that moment felt endued
And strike evil doers wi' terror;
Western breezes softly blowing,
St. Mark yet sees his Lion  where he stood
An' scriechin' out prosaic verse,
The sheep-herd steeks his faulding slap,
Love sits in her smile, a wizard ensnaring;
Awoke the jocund birds to early song
"Or playing with the waterfall."
Now Doll brings the expected pails,
With hectic lips, and eyes up-looking mild,
Which would unteach Mankind the lust to shine or rule:
Furrow'd deep wrinkles in his forehead large,
And still, as boyish hopes did first agree,
Possess whatever bliss thou canst devise,
Sang Ladye-love and War, Romance and Knightly Worth.
Thinking of roads that travel has to find
See! as they chant the tragic hymn, the car
The lads an' lasses, blythely bent
The powers of health and nature when combined.
Here, firm, I rest, they must be best,
It came--it cometh--and will come,--the power
But just a rhymer, like, by chance,
Lo! where it comes like an Eternity,
And in His book of life the inmates poor enrol.
Hear me, auld Hangie, for a wee,
And fixed her shrine within these walls of white:
The foul--the fair--the contrary--the kind--
Yet sure I am, that known to Thee
A feeling more accordant with his strain
Een some tree tops the sheep could reach to bite.
So where old marble cities stood
If wi' the hizzie down ye sent it,
Giving it universal freedom. There
Was hurling mountains in that second war,
Sudden a poplar's height, and 'gan to enclose
Haith, lad, ye little ken about it!
The wind blew from the mountain-peak,
And nought but peat reek i' my head,
An' loot a winze, an' drew a stroke,
He calls his cows or drives his horses on;
Alas! 'twas hardly worth the telling,
An' that glib-gabbet Highland baron,
Who round the North for paler dames would seek?
entertaining to me; after dancing in the window all day from sunrise
Into a shady, fresh, and ripply cove,
Is that of love; love so divine
These words dissolv'd: Crete's forests heard no more.
Still thou would'st love me, still that more than life retain.
Her flesh makes the still air cold.
And listens like a three year's child;
For them the Ceylon diver held his breath,
To tell thee briefly all my joy and pain.
"And I have lost my poor dear boy,
Could grant in benediction: to be free
O fare thee weel, my bonie lass!
That am not yet a glorious denizen
Whilom Ralph, for Doll to wait,
Dear Smith, the sleest, paukie thief,
Of abrupt thunder, when Ionian shoals
Then all I want (O, do thou grant
And bids me beware o' young men;
He found a baby wrapt in mosses, lined
But I, the Queen of a' Scotland,
Filling with spiritual sweets to plenitude,
Not all the blood at Talavera shed,
He wha could brawlie ward their bellum,
O leeze me on my spinning-wheel,
Nae hair-brain'd, sentimental traces,
She sits, as if in Susan's fate
And they have tied him hand and foot,
And shining in the brawling brook, where-by,
In dark green ivy, and among wild larches?
Nor sigh of his, nor plaint, nor passion'd moan
Ye rugged cliffs, o'erhanging dreary glens,
The Titans fierce, self-hid, or prison-bound,
"Thou, to whom every fawn and satyr flies
For some few gasping moments; like a lance,
Yet few of these far majesties, ah, few!
Noiseless as fear in a wide wilderness,
What could it be but love? How a ring-dove
And all we deem delightful, and consume
With tears, as chilly as a dripping well,
Then first she calls the useful many forth;
Full soon I grew sick of my sanctified sot,
I love sweet freedom and the free.
The skeleton of her Titanic form,
Till she saw him, as once she pass'd him by,
God bless your honours a' your days,
Alone they can drink up the morning rain:
A light, whose guidance never fails
With dry cheek who can tell? While thus my might
Now my hard day's work is done,
Tam had got planted unco right;
Anon upon that giant's arm I'll be,
An' makes him quite forget his labour and his toil.
A willow-bough, distilling odorous dew,
Immingled with the mighty dead!
An' tell them with a patriot heat,
The arras, rich with horseman, hawk, and hound,
So may no ruffian feeling in thy breast,
He holds him with his skinny hand,
Thou still unravish'd bride of quietness,
Or say, ye wisdom want, or fire,
There was a cooler light; and so he kept
But ye, I will be bound, like far the best
And, plashing among bedded pebbles, stuck
Making Kings' rights divine, by some Draconic clause.
To honest-hearted, auld Lapraik,
Empty of immortality and bliss!
The third, that gaed a-wee a-back,
Save one old beldame, weak in body and in soul.
There sat auld Nick, in shape o' beast;
And turns for calmness to the pleasant green
This heap of earth o'ergrown with moss
The mavis and the lintwhite sing.
Farewell, my friends! farewell, my foes!
Which, save the linnet's flight, I wot,
It loves in quiet moods to sympathize,
My heart rejoic'd in nature's joy,
These tenderest, and by the nectar-wine,
An' warly cares, an' warly men,
The moor was driegh, and Meg was skiegh,
And thou shouldst moralize on Milton's blindness,
'Tis morn, and the flowers with dew are yet drooping,
The pleasant place of all festivity,
He's a chip of our block, said the blacksmith, and swore;
In the sun's face, like yonder Alpine snow,
Gin she had recovered her hearin',
For, oh! luve forsaken's a tormenting pain.
Flashed the thrilled Spirit's love-devouring heat;
That the bright glance from beauty's eyelids slanting
In lone Endymion's ear, now he has caught
With emblems well devised by amorous pride,
Too soon my heartless spirit failed;
Above us in their beauty, and must reign
O who shall I get for to marry me?
The lass that made the bed to me.
Her closed eyes like weapons sheath'd,
Adventurous knights take up their dinted shields:
Which I brought up, while passing spots of ground
As he sat by the bishop's knee,
The moving Moon went up the sky
The rather for the sun unwilling leaves
Of all her milder-mooned body's grace;
Though with them to converse can rarely be our lot.
Though rival kingdoms press its verdant sides:
Justice, alas! has gi'en him o'er,
Even Gods must yield--Religions take their turn:
For fear that she wyle your fancy frae me.
To wyte her countrymen wi' treason!
Though brought from fortune's mirkest gloom.
Th' Inquisitor of Spain the most expert
Of service done with careless cruelty,
But they to me no joy can give,
That treason thus could sell us,
In early spring, when winds blow chilly cold,
The best laid schemes o' mice an' men,
That will not look beyond the tomb,
If self the wavering balance shake,
And een the dearest--that I loved the best--
And stooping holds her hands before her face,--
Would take the muses' servants by the hand;
Whose arch or pillar meets me in the face,
Hear, Land o' Cakes and brither Scots,
Farewell! a word that must be, and hath been--
I hope frae heav'n to see them yet
And silent was the flock in woolly fold:
Fearless for power of thought, without thine aid?--
Have left the mosses green below,
Fatigued he sinks into some pleasant lair
She shudders and you hear her cry,
Into those regions? The Morphean fount
O death! thou tyrant fell and bloody!
Were richer than the songs of Grecian years?--
The crocus, patty kay, the rich hearts' ease;
While in his grips be press'd me.
Nurtured in blood betimes, his heart delights
Gie fine braw claes to fine life-guards,
As pastoral minstrels in her merry train
The dearest siller that ever I wan!
And chirping sparrows dropping from the eaves
Circles, and arcs, and broad-belting colure,
Another way he went, and soon among
Show'd he was nane o' Scotland's dogs;
Was none. She burnt, she lov'd the tyranny,
In a long whispering birth enchanted grew
From heaven it came on angel's wing
Yet still with consciousness; and there it stands
"You know him--him you often see;
White flowers their mourners are, Nature their passing bell.
Though fortune's road be rough an' hilly
I have no comfort for thee, no not one:
But thus it was; and though in solitude
And many goodly states and kingdoms seen;
Until exhausted of the latest drop,
War mouldeth there each weapon to his need--
To the weavers gin ye go, fair maids,
Boccaccio  to his parent earth bequeathed
When Cava's traitor-sire first called the band
The lightning rent from Ariosto's bust
Oer garments renten clambering over stiles.
That thus they all shall meet in future days:
Had stood a pigmy's height: she would have ta'en
Even in its earliest nurture; what subdued,
Sits on the firm-set ground--and this the clouds must claim.
Though in their souls, which thus each other thwarted,
He looked, and met its beam without a thought,
An' there will be gleg Colonel Tam;
Winds only blow straws, dust, and feathers away.
When, looking up, he saw her features bright
Their memory lingers round the heart
Sounds not the clang of conflict on the heath?
Of secret grief, here in this bowery nest.
_Now_ is past since last we met
Their fellow huntsmen o'er the wide champaign
Each one kept shroud, nor to his neighbour gave
I lea'e my blessin wi' you baith:
And like to princes in their slumbers lie,
The dank blea wind, that whistles thinly by
The war-note of Lochiel, which Albyn's hills
Not long--for soon into her heart a throng
Through the still night dash'd hoarse along the shore.
My chain of grief: no longer strive to find
Along the flow'ry banks of Cree.
From her research hath been, that these are walls--
How they seem'd to fill the sea and air
Beset thy servant e'en and morn,
Where the little Jenny wrens cock their tails among the hens,
All felt the common joy they now must feign,
For Johnny has his holly-bough,
But why of that epocha make such a fuss,
With lips that tremble, and with glistening eye
Outstrips our faint expression; even so this
About the leaves, and flowers--about the playing
Yet by the forelock is the hold to catch him;
Careful and soft, that not a leaf may fall
And humming hive-bees homeward hurry bye:
And, if thy lute is here, softly intreat
The wind of that eternal ditty sings,
And he in loneliness: he felt assur'd
Accept a Bardie's gratefu' thanks!
With daily boon of fish most delicate:
Of their old piety, and of their glee:
But I lo'e the dear lassie because she lo'es me.
Fainting I fell into a bed of flowers,
Precipitously steep; and drawing near,
Of thy combing hand, the while it travelling cloys
Young dove of the waters! truly I'll not hurt
And faithful Petrarch gloriously crown'd.
There's monie a lass has broke my rest,
The drowsy Dungeon-clock,  had number'd two,
He did not rave, he did not stare aghast,
To venture so: it fills me with amaze
Of sic an ugly, Gothic hulk as you.
She dirl'd them aff fu' clearly, O,
While sheep nor oxen dare not crop their flowers
And I was stopping up my frantic ears,
And Venus, constant to her native Sea,
For she, not over stout of limb,
"For slow and slow that ship will go,
They'll mak' what rules and laws they please;
My lov'd, my honour'd, much respected friend!
Along a huge cloud's ridge; and now with sprightly
Make their consequence thy care:
That lingered in the air like dying rolls
Perusing Bunyan, Brown, an' Boston;
There taste that life of life--immortal love.--
That day their neebors' blood to spill;
Nor th' balm that draps on wounds of woe
They've ta'en him to the gallows knowe,
Tho' something like moisture conglobes in my eye,
A' kinds o' boxes, mugs, an' bottles,
So spake they to their pillows; but, alas,
The bee will make its bloom a bed,
Ah, Monarchs! could ye taste the mirth ye mar,
To her for the last time. Night will strew
And the priest he rode her sair;
And 'scape at once from Hope's accursed bands;
There even toil itself was play;
As pale it lay upon the rosy couch:
He had in truth; and he was ripe for tears.
Must see behind, as doth the hunted hare.
To sit on rocks--to muse o'er flood and fell--
Smile through an in-door lattice, all delight.
Can still suspect, and still revere himself,
He saves for me my precious soul;
And say, "here was, or is," where all is doubly night?
The prayers they dare no louder say;
Their voices to the clouds, a fair wrought car,
The while they cool themselves, they freshness give,
'Twas icy, and the cold ran through his veins;
Had I the wyte, had I the wyte,
Canst thou read aught? O read for pity's sake!
And tell me how"--"Good Saints! not here, not here;
Possess'd for glory, two fair argent wings,
'Mid hush'd, cool-rooted flowers, fragrant-eyed,
Their ruffled locks where meeting hazels darken;
We've got frae a' professions, sets, and ranks:
Through his forgotten hands: then would they sigh,
Met palsy half way: soon these limbs became
With wheels at hand of mallow seeds,
The gen'rous purpose, nobly dear,
I have a boy of five years old,
Adieu, my Liege! may freedom geck
And, wildly staring, spurns, with sounding foot,
Stretching his indolent arms, he took, O bliss!
Till quickly, wearied with that spacious seat
And the shadows grow to giants; that bright ball never stirs:
Or is't the paughty, feudal Thane,
The dumb rejoicing in the Lord.
The yellow corn was waving ready;
She dwelt but half retir'd, and there had led
He flies to her arms he lo'es best--
When threads doth hang from thorn to thorn
To Nature's God and Nature's law,
But, Och! he gaed and ne'er return'd!
At thy blythe carol clears his furrow'd brow.
--Nay, Traveller! rest. This lonely yew-tree stands
Shew cold through watery pinions; make more bright
Nor for my ten white shillings luke.
And fled each muse that glorious once inspir'd,
Shows her a knife.--"What feverous hectic flame
We darena weel say't, though we ken wha's to blame,
She breath'd upon his eyes, and swift was seen
A reekit wee devil looks over the wa';
Their jugglin' hocus-pocus arts
Yet withers on till all without is old,
She watch'd me by the hie-gate side.
Dew-dabbled on their stalks, the ouzel sung
Than wings of swans, than doves, than dim-seen eagle?
Forest on forest hung about his head
Of them that perished in the whirlwind's sweep,
Down dropt the breeze, the Sails dropt down,
So Nelly, starting, half awake,
And ye'll ha'e a calf's head o' sma' value.
Yet green the juicy hawthorn grows,
'Tween Herod's hip an Polycrate,--
And more beloved existence:  that which Fate
Did he not this for France? which lay before
I'll gie John Ross another bawbee,
Fare thee weel, thou best and dearest!
Now would you see this aged thorn,
That hangs his head, and a' that?
He strays amang the woods and briers;
Forget it was not day! On moonlight bushes,
Her smile is, as the evening mild,
Of Nereids were about him, in kind strife
The charioteer with wond'rous gesture talks
And nought but threshers' flails awake the dreary day.
Tho' shelter'd in the lowest shed
Shaped by some solitary Nymph, whose breast
For Right the third, our last, our best, our dearest,
And on thy cheeks a fading rose
'Till spiritty knowes wad rair't and risket,
While one small close and cow their wants maintained,
Ye monarchs tak the east and west,
O let me slake it at the running springs!
This freedom in an unknown frien'
Before our lips knew else but solemn sounds;
Which uttered, to the hearer's eye appear
Young Hodge the horse-boy, with a soodly gait,
I sing the juice Scotch bear can mak us,
Would be to find where violet beds were nestling,
_There_ were his young barbarians all at play,
From peak to peak, the rattling crags among
And health robust, from every care unbound,
But, swift as dreams, myself I found
Now haud you there, ye're out o' sight,
But by yon moon!--and that's high swearin'--
Of Montmorenci. Why so sad a moan?
Bumptious and vain and proud he shoulders up
But here I never miss'd it yet.
Though now it moved him as it moves the wise;
"Leave thee alone! Look back! Ah, Goddess, see
Of heaven and earth had faded: deepest shades
Ca' them whare the burnie rowes,
Some rhyme to court the countra clash,
Because he knew not whither he was going.
'Twill please me mair to hear an' see it
The loftiest peaks most wrapt in clouds and snow;
Of late, too, I have had much calm enjoyment,
The dark dreary winter, and wild driving snaw,
While empty greatness saves a worthless name!
No shrine, no grove, no oracle, no heat
But, hark! a rap comes gently to the door;
And twilight in the east, a doubt as yet,
It runs a sicker brook, cold and chill.
To hear of knightly deeds, and gallant spurning
Dread of black coats and rev'rend wigs,
Their music came to my o'er-sweeten'd soul;
That strang necessity supreme is
Tho' father and mither and a' should gae mad,
For my love was a gay knight's heir,
Ye'll find him ay a dainty chiel,
Not once more did I close my happy eyes
I was the happiest of a' the clan,
Or stand in courtly talk by fives and sevens:
I'll build an Indian bower; I know
And poise about in cloudy thunder-tents
Wi' glowing e'en an' lifted han's,
Clings cruelly to us, like the gnawing sloth
The lord of irony,--that master-spell,
An' lows'd his tinkler jaw, man.
These little flowers beheld him too,
That dark, mysterious name of horrid sound?
Catches his freshness from Archangel's wing:
Yet ye'll neglect to show your parts,
Wi' cannie care, they've placed them
The Heart, lone mourner of its baffled zeal,
With leaden looks: the solitary breeze
Till the tired jade the wheel forgets to hurl,
I went bed agen and did nothing but dream
To offer to the passing stranger's gaze
That did both drown and keep alive my ears.
As mine and Albert's common Foster-mother.
That heart how sunk, a prey to grief and care;
Till down he drops and plunges to the chin,
And Tasso is their glory and their shame--
And I neglect the holy rite for thee.
Put life and mettle in their heels:
The freaks, and dartings of the black-wing'd swallow,
If thou be one whose heart the holy forms
Chimæra's Alps extend from left to right:
And the spell closes with its silent seal--
It's naething but a milder feature,
Pipes will I fashion of the syrinx flag,
And know so much of Parliament and state
I'll be bound ye'll meet again.
And from the Alban Mount we now behold
Wi' reaming swats, that drank divinely;
Ane curses feet that fyl'd his shins,
But thou hast a waukrife minnie."
"Poor Harry Gill is very cold."
And humbly begs you'll mind the important NOW!
It's not the roar o' sea or shore
O Titans, shall I say 'Arise!'--Ye groan:
The Muezzin's call doth shake the minaret,
Come counsel, dear Tittie! don't tarry--
To grant a heart is fairly civil,
And then another, then another strain,
For Paddy Burke, like ony Turk,
And when the little breezes make
Mingled indeed with what is sweet and strong,
Crouching and sleeping neath its grassy lair,
Were a delight; and if the freshening sea
A dusky empire and its diadems;
And shine in worthless lays, the theme of transient song.
I sought for her smooth arms and lips, to slake
Ca' them whare the burnie rowes,
The op'ning gowan, wat wi' dew,
He looks on trifles and bemoans their pain,
Then let your schemes alone in the state;
To crown your happiness he asks your leave,
How a restoring chance came down to quell
Her pride, her freedom; and not freedom's shade.
With tottering age, and dignified content,
While Willie's far frae Logan braes.
One friendly sigh for him--he asks no more,--
The only tune he knows still whistling oer,
We thought ay death wad bring relief,
"That nothing of itself will come,
And with them take the Poet's prayer;
Bear up against it: so farewel, sad sigh;
And never can be born of atomies
And there she wept and sigh'd full sore,
O Mary with the dark brown hair,
And pumpkins neath the window used to climb;
He gied me thee, o' tocher clear,
Her mantle large, of greenish hue,
Shook with eternal palsy, I did wed
But she my fairest faithfu' lass,
To catch a glance at silver throated eels,--
But when to all the evil of misfortune
Does ony great man glunch an' gloom?
And maun I still on Menie doat,
The arena swims around him--he is gone,
Leeze me on thy bonnie craigie,
Or rhymes an' sangs he'd made himsel',
The shepherd stops his simple reed,
From vales deflower'd, or forest-trees branch-rent,
But accept it, good Sir, as a mark of regard,
They hough'd the clans like nine-pin kyles,
Inveterate in virtue? Did she lean
Of any spirit to tell, but one of those
Again?--on tip-toe down the hill
Your royal nest beneath your wing,
An' she has twa sparkling roguish een.
Of silent, sharp endurance--he can tell
A Beauty and a Mystery, and create
Well you know how much you grieve me;
With that untaught innate philosophy,
For fear that she wyle your fancy frae me.
There's some are fou o' brandy;
Weep in the public roads alone.
Here let me sit upon this massy stone,
And are themselves the fools to those they fool;
There came an eastern voice of solemn mood:--
With hair blown back, and wings put cross-wise on their breasts.
Welcome, welcome, ye dark-blue waves!
Sweeter than that nurse Amalthea skimm'd
The idiot strum of vanity bemused,
Then is it wise to damp our bliss?
Still let me dive into the joy I seek,--
Open afresh your round of starry folds,
A Friar, who gathered simples in the wood,
Traitor! coward! turn and flee!
Invested her with all that's wild and sweet;
(His very words I give to you,)
May never wicked man bamboozle him!
To trains of peaceful images: the stirs
Who says, that fool alone is not thy due,
On Harold's page, Ianthe's here enshrined
Does nonsense mend like whiskey, when imported?
Or stumble oer a stile he meant to climb,
Many old rotten-timber'd boats there be
For thae frank, rantin', ramblin' billies,
Have left us nearly where we had begun:
By thought supplied, or any interest
Pass into nothingness; but still will keep
When I think on John Highlandman.
On the only aged willow that in all the field remains,
Lang mustering up a bitter blast;
Thou'lt break my heart, thou warbling bird,
Who stints his rambles with her frequent showers;
Arouse, my boys! exert your mettle,
Whase only faut is loving thee?
May his son be a hangman, and he his first trial.
The little birds began to stir,
To cheer you through the weary widdle
And, ere again another year came round,
By the most soft completion of thy face,
Into the light of heaven, and in their stead
Must dreams themselves be; seeing they're more slight
Ghosts of melodious prophecyings rave
He lean'd him to an ancient aik,
Though accident, blind contact, and the strong
And so he groan'd, as one by beauty slain.
Has from thy sceptre pass'd; and all the air
But every joy and pleasure's fled,
Where these are new and strange, are ominous.
Which others hailed with real or mimic awe,
Some teach the bard, a darling care,
Bending thee 'mang the dewy weet,
Who's got new caps, and who a gown,
And fated to excel us, as we pass
About the earth: happy are ye and glad.
The deuks dang o'er my daddie, O!
Thee must I praise above all other glories
Shall weave a wreath to honour thee;
She'd wade oer shoes to reach it in the dyke;
But peace attune thy gentle soul to rest,
Go, read whate'er is writ of bloodiest strife:
Nor longer mourn thy fate is hard,
That those deceptions which for pleasure go
Are ay with him that's far away.
His sister's sorrow; and his wanderings all,
For Isabel, sweet Isabel, will die;
Their leaves and prickly nuts; a sheep-fold bleat
Upbraid na me wi' cauld disdain!
Whose numbers without counting may be seen
I ance was ty'd up like a stirk,
From out the middle air, from flowery nests,
Rock, river, forest, mountain, all abound,
And Fire from Hell reared his gigantic shape,
Of scribbling lines for you. These things I thought
And sudden cannon. All! how all this hums,
Clusters of grapes, the which they raven'd quick
And rubbing of white hands, and sparkling eyes:
As Pallas and the Muse unveil their awful lore.
I think my wife will end her life
No song nor dance I bring from yon great city
Tearing my nerves wi' bitter pang,
Now Morning from her orient chamber came,
Ten thousand glitt'ring pounds a-year?
And there, my babe; we'll live for aye.
But still the preaching cant forbear,
To touch this flower into human shape!
When first we hear the shy-come nightingales,
Mild as a star in water; for so new,
That day, ye was a jinker noble,
'Mid looks of love, defiance, hate, and scorn,
To change his purpose. He thereat was stung,
I saw the crackling flashes drive;
I wad nae gie a button for her.
The oak Leviathans,  whose huge ribs make
How HE, who bore in Heaven the second name,
Death felt it to his inwards: 'twas too much:
Combustion thro' our boroughs rode,
Strange sound it was, when the pale shadow spake;
But I have seen the soaring Jungfrau rear
Sudden upon the elmtree tops the crow
From thee! if in another station born,
Full, and round like globes that rise
The Thames flows proudly to the sea,
And marriage aff-hand, were his proffers:
The gulf! and how the Giant Element
Say, I intreat thee, what achievement high
But gie me a canny hour at e'en,
When his fetters at night have so press'd on his limbs,
He views new knowledge with suspicious eyes
The minutes wing'd their way wi' pleasure:
Haurl thee hame to his black smiddie,
As Day and Night contending were, until
Thus wears the month along, in checkered moods,
Old castaways, now swallowed in neglect;
O sweet grows the lime and the orange,
"O, Oread-Queen! would that thou hadst a pain
Now must the Pastor's arm his _lambs_ defend:
What time you were before the music sitting,
He whom you love, your idiot boy.
Of this still region all his winter-sleep.
That over lands new ploughed and meadow grounds,
Aye, thus it was one thousand years ago.
Now highest reign'st, with boundless sway!
A prayer from the muse you well may excuse,
On the damp grass myriads of lingering leaves,
My heart-warm love to guid auld Glen,
Ye curlews calling thro' a clud;
If love for love thou wilt na gie,
Of many things which never troubled me;
And all devout, he never sought
(A souple jade she was and strung,)
Or Fergusson's, the bauld and slee,
"And now, my bairns, wi' my last breath
I thought me on the ourie cattle,
O, dool on the day I met wi' an auld man!
She was with child, and she was mad,
But though her face was clear as infant's eyes,
With copple crown uplifted high,
To hunt the moon that's in the brook,
Oh! that the Desert were my dwelling-place,
Nations have knelt to for the keys of Heaven!
Thy sunny hues, fair forms, and breathing sweets,
See, aged Winter, 'mid his surly reign,
There is the moral of all human tales;
I tremble, and can only bend the knee;
At Yarico's sweet notes of grief
Wi' teats o' hay, an' ripps o' corn.
For he loved the time too well.
Adown my cheeks the pearls ran,
Through stones past the counting it bubbles red hot.
A female form, came from the tow'rs of Stair:
This may sound strangely: but when, dearest girl,
To poison Fortune's ruthless dart,
But richer far posterity's award.
But I have had my summer thrills,
His spindle shank a guid whip-lash,
Such charms with mild intelligences shine,
"The planks look warp'd, and see those sails
"Before I surrender so glorious a prize,
On such a catering trust my dizzy head.
The atom darkness in a slow turmoil;
And dropt my vision to the horizon's verge;
Dull is the eye that will not weep to see
And, with a blind voluptuous rage, I gave
Whither his brethren, bleating with content,
The horned Moon, with one bright Star
Down a precipitous path, as if impell'd.
That inlet to severe magnificence
It lives in blushes and in sighs,
Its silly wa's the win's are strewin'!
Prop of my dearest hopes for future times.
Endymion: woe! woe! is grief contain'd
This fierce temptation went: and thou may'st not
Still thro' the gap the struggling river toils,
Fareweel, my "rhyme-composing brither!"
Man then is useful to his kind,
Cauld poverty, wi' hungry stare,
Yet, though dull Hate as duty should be taught,
For then I am lockt in thy arms--Jessy!
His energies roll back upon his heart,
And grim, surly winter is near?
In Summer's lap with flowers to lie.
Her hair was long, her foot was light
(Hey, and the rue grows bonnie wi' thyme),
By sun or moonlight, to the influxes
Till Hamiltons, at least a dizen,
But now of all the world I love thee best.
Bring autumn's pleasant weather;
More than her fell Pizarros once enchained:
He knew it well, and hastened fearful down
That aye refreshing, pure deliciousness,
At all times of the day and night
Men's being mortal, immortal; to shake
While still the dazzling globe maintain'd eclipse,
Why, Nature, waste thy wonders on such men?
Even there her other works are foil'd
His head upon a mossy hillock green,
From Lycius answer'd, as heart-struck and lost,
And flang them a' out o'er the burn.
There speckled thrush, by self-delight embued,
The polish'd leaves and berries red
And such she was;--her daughters had their dowers
There, latest mark'd her vanish'd sail."
I struck, and with a single blow
I care nae wealth a single flie;
A man who does not move with pain, but moves
When I recount thy worshippers of yore
Man's heart, and view the Hell that's there.
Would never teach a rural song to me:
And for ever disowns thee, her ain Jock Rab.
Then roll to me, along your wandering spheres,
The passing traveller with wonder sees
Can I prize thee, fair maid, till price above,
And every year come in mair dear
Dash'd by the wood-nymph's beauty, so he burn'd;
Sir Knave is a fool in a session;
Until a melancholy numbs my limbs;
Northward he turneth through a little door,
Beneath the load of years and cares,
At last into a dark and vapoury tent--
Imagined in its little schemes of thought;
That Lycius could not love in half a fright,
O Eighty-eight, in thy sma' space
The gloomy night is gath'ring fast,
Pay orisons for this suspension of disgust.
Of all these lovers, and she grieved so
Whom prose has turned out of doors,
What champions ventur'd, what champions fell;
And scarce a name distinguisheth the brook,
A chamber, myrtle wall'd, embowered high,
To prove the fondness of some passing boy,
And shook them from their slumbers on the throne;
They sway'd about upon a rocking horse,
And knew not why. My happy father died
Glenriddel,  skill'd in rusty coins,
Her limbs are all alive with joy.
Wha wad soon dry the tear frae his Phillis's e'e.
O, thou, my Muse! guid auld Scotch drink;
What Mind can make, when Nature's self would fail;
His dearest friend and brother scarcely knew!
Forgetfulness were mercy for their sake;
With syren words--Ah, have I really got
But now such mighty learning meets his ears
And went into that dismal forest-hearse.
Auld Nature swears the lovely dears
Gars auld claes look amaist as weel's the new;
And een could tell a nation how to act;
While our four travellers homeward wend;
"Oh! Johnny, never mind the Doctor;
The tender father and the gen'rous friend.
Behold the lass o' Ballochmyle!
Manna and dates, in argosy transferr'd
And the toper he hiccuped and ended his speech;
Thy rudely carroll'd, chiming phrase,
And are ye hale, and weel, and cantie?
He sinks adown a solitary glen,
Of wonder pleased, or awe which would adore
And bluest skies that harmonise the whole:
Sung the loud song, and dared the deed of war?
Wad ding a' Lallan tongue, or Erse,
Or lost perhaps, and never found;
O haud your tongue, the bishop says,
Her silver seasons four upon the night,
Thy song, nor ever can those trees be bare;
Says black Joan o' Crighton-peel,
And those which waved are shredless dust ere now,
Can Volume, Pillar, Pile preserve thee great?
But I look to the west, when I gae to rest,
My beauty, little child, is flown;
Of Joy the sojourn, and of Wealth the mart;
Stay! though a Naiad of the rivers, stay!
Their hearts o' stane, gin night, are gane,
Whaur'll ye e'er see men sae happy,
Its brightness soon exhaled away
In youth by his own thoughts; still uncompelled,
Strive in thy humble sphere to shine;
To be my bosom's teazing guest.
Outpeering Time, too lofty for decay.
And oft, robb'd of my perfect mind, I thought
While, neighbouring nigh, one lonely elder-tree
But now, as if a thing unblest by Man,
"For sense they little owe to frugal heav'n--
And wi' your pleading let it be;
And thus I am absorbed, and this is life:--
Vain Sophistry! in these behold the tools,
And thou shall aid--hast thou not aided me?
My lady's gown, there's gairs upon't,
The beast again can bear us baith,
And I'll make them roar out like the wind in a storm
To swell one bloated Chiefs unwholesome reign?
Ye're safer at your spinning-wheel;
The Pilgrims of his Genius. He arose
Who, in the silent hour of inward thought,
Behold upon this happy earth we are;
With tears whose course no effort could confine,
A spoil amongst them. I prepar'd to flee
That the wall tottered, and had well-nigh fallen
Thy waters washed  them power while they were free,
Your brunstane devilship I see,
Her Hogarth-art perhaps she meant to show it)
Which hurryingly they gain'd, and enter'd straight.
Quaff blood and water; nor the stranger's sword
The morning sun-beams to the great Apollo
Shame-blushes at betrayed distress,
The hall door shuts again, and all the noise is gone.
He ca's his coach, he ca's his horse;
"An honest man's the noblest work of God."
And reach into thy heart,--when mine is cold,--
I whyles claw the elbow o' troublesome thought;
Wood strawberries faded from wood sides,
Ae spring brought off her master hale,
'Twas a hard time for Goody Blake.
Then 'gan she work again; nor stay'd her care,
These lovers did embrace, and we must weep
As gracefully descending, light and thin,
There, pains which nature could no more support,
So wait awhile expectant. Pr'ythee soon,
Pluck'd witless the weak flowers, till thine arm
To see who shall be first to pluck the prize--
And should some patron be so kind,
And turns away from every smile she meets.
When a new planet swims into his ken;
Plainer and plainer shewing, till at last
A scepter'd hand, a king's command,
The inviolate Island of the sage and free,
The scoffer's insult passed thee by,
She swore she saw some rebels run
Toss'd up the silver spume against the clouds.
We'll o'er the water and o'er the sea,
While some old shepherd listened to the lay.
The bloom's on the brere, bonny lassie O!
Whom Youth and Youth's affections bound to me;
Into a marble gallery, passing through
Coquettish in ambition--still he aimed--
Its own sweet grief at parting. Overhead,
Dead; and because the creature could not spit
Disabled age shall seize thee; and even then
They're better just than want ay
But, gentle Orb! there came a nearer bliss--
Where with intention I have err'd,
Enough their whitest arms in silence clinging:
Your mournful Psyche, nor the downy owl
Some gapin' glowrin' countra laird,
But ere his sackcloth garb Repentance wear,
When Willie wand'ring thro' the wood,
A rose leaf round thy finger's taperness,
Two poor old dames, as I have known,
While oer the odd flowers swim grandfather bees
A silent space with ever sprouting green.
Conjure thee to receive our humble Pæan,
As from the fondest lover part,
My weary watching. Though thou know'st it not,
Still so slow to drive a-field,
Rest I ne wist, for there n'as erthly wight
It is not, outdo him, the task is, out-thieve him.
Come hand in hand with one so beautiful.
And bright in cloudless skies his sun go down!
Thy hopes of Immortality--and thou
Thou art not the beginning nor the end.
Steal thro' a winnock frae a whore,
The like was never heard of yet,
Reach that same rose that heedless scorn
Till Revenge, wi' laurell'd head,
And England, triumphant, display her proud Rose:
And let him come at twelve o'clock,
In hell they'll roast thee like a herrin'!
The Queen who conquers all must yield to thee--
Might seem a work of pain; so not enough
The bearded Turk that rarely deigns to speak,
Are then regalities all gilded masks?
Cities from out their sepulchres: men bled
O blaw, ye westlin winds, blaw saft
And where they do, the breeze blows cool the while,
Where Doon rins, wimplin', clear,
But I foor up the glen at e'en,
And though I own the spot no more
To view the huge design which sprung from such a birth!
E'en let her flyte her fill, jo.
It maks my heart sae cheery, O,
To me hae the charms o' yon wild, mossy moors;
Thy tide washed down the blood of yesterday,
The shriek that from the distant battle broke!
And the soft quiet hamlet where he dwelt
O when will green grass cover me?
Tho' Fortune sair upon him laid,
Warlocks and witches in a dance;
Fears for my Willie brought tears in my e'e;
Whence Calidore might have the goodliest view
With buds, and bells, and stars without a name,
I felt upmounted in that region
I peeled bits of straws and I got switches too
Sprung from night, in darkness lost;
When on the pleasant grass such love, lovelorn,
Sate Brunswick's fated Chieftain; he did hear
Should be the light which streams here,--to illume
She dresses ay sae clean and neat,
The rantin' dog, the daddie o't.
Save where some solitary column  mourns
Half lost, and all old hymns made nullity!
When they have tired their gentle limbs, with play,
To these sweet poets of the summer fields;
And in his freaks had Luath ca'd him,
Their spoils here? Yes; and in yon field below,
They hack'd and hash'd, while broad-swords clash'd,
I turn full hearted to the friendly aids
But rather, giving them to the filled sight
Then oer the rushes flies again,
For pity sang this roundelay----
And crowded growth of wheat and beans,
Gie me Rob, I'll seek nae mair,
To chasten and subdue. And I have felt
To wake into a slumberous tenderness;
And all its thousand turns disclose
An' wi' a curchie low did stoop,
Our toils obscure, and a' that;
Come, bring the tither mutchkin in,
But rarely seen since Nature's birth,
Or frosts on hills of Ochiltree
Unmindful that the thorn is near,
Has legion'd all his battle; and behold
And now at once, adventuresome, I send
Were puny, vague, and nothingness to thee:
The gambols and wild freaks at shearing time;
With the remorse of ages; and the crown
Woke early, I arose and thought that first
Here pause--and, through the starting tear,
Soon she turn'd up a soiled glove, whereon
And then upon the grass I sit, and moan,
The tomb, the earth, which fades like dew!
With his melodious tears, he gave himself to Fame.
Teems not each ditty with the glorious tale?
And what is Death? is still the cause unfound?
And say, "How can you e'er propose,
In little journeys, I beheld in it
When eer she thought my look was turned aside;
The cauld blue north was streaming forth
In hungry pride and gainful cowardice,
And flagrant from the scourge he grunted, _ai!_
Yet even the ha' folk fill their pechan
And time from that eternal tree,
Gave temperate sweets to that well-wooing sun;
An she has twa sparkling roguish een.
Ah, could I see a spinney nigh,
The cork-trees hoar that clothe the shaggy steep,
But here Youth offers to Old Age the food,
He found him in a little moonlight room,
Once more been tortured with renewed life.
Wins as it wanders, dazzles where it dwells,
With tawny smoked flesh and tattered rags,
And not a tree, beneath whose rooty shade
While tumbling brown, the burn comes down,
But joy just then was up and whistled bye
Thy countrymen, before thee born to shine,
Ye've nought to do but mark and tell
He falls in the blaze of his fame!
Chequer my tablet with their, quivering shades.
What first inspired a bard of old to sing
Ever exalted at the God's approach:
Than the sense, wit, and taste of a sweet lovely dame.
Save one vain Man, who is not in the grave--
I stood and stand alone,--remembered or forgot.
And waft my dear laddie ance mair to my arms.
What is more gentle than a wind in summer?
And maddened in that vision --are exprest
And I would tell it all to you;
"As if you were her first-born birth,
There was ae sang, amang the rest,
An' each for other's welfare kindly spiers:
And made his hands to struggle in the air,
Now green's the sod, and cauld's the clay,
She calm'd its wild hair with a golden comb,
Soon was God Bacchus at meridian height;
Ca' them whare the heather growes;
I know the earth-nuts fit for food;
The Clachan yill had made me canty,
Oft did he mark the scenes of vanished war,
But that's a word I need na say:
Honour's war we strongly waged,
Broke through the careful silence; for they heard
Hoping the morn in ease and rest to spend,
Snuff at its faint extreme, and seem to tire,
But only--he's no just begun yet.
And skipping like a leveret before the peep of day
Such power to madden thee? And is it true--
For there are people nowadays, Lord knows,
Just spreading out its scolloped leaves is seen,
And thou, dread Statue!  yet existent in
He seized his harp, which he at times could string,
Sae I shall say, an' that's nae flatt'rin',
Though Man and Man's avenging arms assail,
His darin' look had daunted me;
Who with such treachery tries their hearts to move,
The trees and greenwood wear the deepest green.
Hath let thee to this Cave of Quietude.
Delicious Avon, with a mournful sound,
Looking round for friendly hands
Levelled Aventicum,  hath strewed her subject lands.
Whose large blue eyes, fair locks, and snowy hands,
A thought, and claims the homage of a tear;
She sees him in his travelling trim;
His seat beneath the honeyed sycamore
But Cadiz, rising on the distant coast,
My lonely madness. Speak, my kindest fair!
Is the curse in a dead man's eye!
That sound the first amidst the festival,
To liken them to your auld-warld squad,
Nodding at midnight o'er the calm bay's breast,
She has a world of ready wealth,
That, plac'd by thee upon the wish'd-for height,
Where long ago a giant battle was;
Her voice will oft my sleep surprise,
Kneel'd down beside it, and with tenderest force
Ev'n love an' friendship, should give place
With death-shot glowing in his fiery hands,
Jane still is yours till you come back agen
Her faultless form and gracefu' air;
When he was well and on the lea
See how the Mighty shrink into a song!
Which at this moment is in sunbeams drest:
Flowers fresh in hue, and many in their class,
A link reluctant in a fleshly chain,
And the tann'd harvesters rich armfuls took.
Gives proof sufficient of its vanity.
And while in peace cows eat, and chew their cuds,
Believe how I love thee, believe how near
When shall my soul, in silent peace,
Is but of gradual grasp--and as it is
Sang, of delicious love and honey'd dart;
Works like a skiff against the stream,
light and shade upon them in the dewy morning; every thorn-point and
Though yours was nought but silver twist
Be thou deck'd in silken stole,
But never yet hath seen, nor e'er shall see
I know that they must withered be,
The mind is coloured by thy every hue;
And doubly were the poet blest,
Heavens! should the branded character be mine!
Her head upon my throbbing breast,
With the subsiding crystal: as when ocean
In some untrodden region of my mind,
They think me the moral of mother
And Betty's standing at the door,
The rustle of those ample skirts about
What though while the wonders of nature exploring,
Of things eternal, mounting to divine,
Save to St. Agnes and her lambs unshorn,
Of life and sufferance make its firm abode
Themselves their monument; --the Stygian coast
Ah, Tam! Ah, Tam! thou'll get thy fairin'!
Ev'n on a plain no humble beauties lie,
That writhes about the roots of Sicily:
Still pressing onward, red-wat shod,
To find where this sweet nymph prepar'd her secret bed:
As are the tiger-moth's deep-damask'd wings;
O'er Pegasus I'll fling my leg,
Love's the cloudless summer sun,
Meek Peace voluptuous lures was ever wont to shun.
Its long lost grandeur: fir trees grow around,
The queerest shape that e'er I saw,
In their baronial feuds and single fields,
His young disciple. "'Tis no common rule,
And think na, my auld, trusty servan',
Said the host, for the stingo is worth a strong pull.
Wi' justice they may mark your head--
And float along like birds o'er summer seas;
And ranked plagues their numbers tell,
Thou cheers the heart o' drooping Care;
A meaner sound than Raphael's whispering.
And tears that flowed for ills which patience could not heal.
I took her for some Scottish Muse,
As feckless as a wither'd rash,
Henceforth was dove-like.--Loth was he to move
But thou, beneath the random bield
And, furthermore, her brethren wonder'd much
Oh! then how her old bones would shake!
Our coming evils with a crutch-like rod,
Heave his broad shoulder o'er the edge of the world,
The glorious features of the bards who sung
O come thy ways to me, my Eppie M'Nab!
Up then bespake the brave Whitefoord,
But thou remembers we are dust,
Then sudden it grew hot, and all the pains
About his large dark locks, and faultering spake:
Here lies John Bushby, honest man!
For sure so fair a place was never seen,
Her walie nieves like midden-creels,
Drown both, and press them both against earth's face,
Of buds into ripe flowers; or by the flitting
That I am oft in doubt whether at all
Out-shooting sometimes, like a meteor-star,
With a fit mind the might which I behold;
Why pierce high-fronted honour to the quick
All treasures, all delights, that Eye or Ear,
Against the window-panes; St. Agnes' moon hath set.
The landlord's laugh was ready chorus:
Some ever-fleeting music on they sweep.
The Sun came up upon the right,
Though but a lonely way, yet mystery hangs
And straight all flush'd; so, lisped tenderly,
There Architecture's noble pride
Thou ne'er took such a blethrin' b--ch
For nature smiles as sweet, I ween,
She's bow hough'd, she's hem shinn'd,
Blood-purchased thrones and banquet halls.
And soon on board the Lusian pilots leap,
And tells the midnight moon her care;
Ye, like a rash-buss, stood in sight,
They bar the door on frosty win's;
I saw from the door all his track in the dew
For any living thing, hath faculties
The voice of nature loudly cries,
His voice was heard thro' muir and dale,
To hear the marriage melodies, and then
And maist has kill'd my Hoggie.
And sae may the Heavens forget me
But your green graff, now, Luckie Laing,
As to my sonnets, though none else should heed them,
In ministring the potent rule of fate
There breathes a living fragrance from the shore,
Proscribed the Bard whose name for evermore
Who strike, blest hirelings! for their country's good,
And frae his harp sic strains did flow,
The herdsman may have left his startled cows
Through mossy rocks; where, 'mid exuberant green,
Like Love's alarum pattering the sharp sleet
Feel not a want but what yourselves create,
Ane sat, weel brac'd wi' mealy bags,
Quo' she, "Ye ken, we've been sae busy,
In an old corner cupboard by the wall
Domestic peace and comforts crowning
Resolv'd was I, at least to try,
Who laps a moss ball in the meadow grass
To cheer thy bankrupt pomp, the willing lark
Tho' father and mither and a' should gae mad,
She even shuns and fears the bolder wind,
When his Delhis  come dashing in blood o'er the banks,
And where Alfonso bade his poet dwell:
They turn at once to cats or hares,
Or Wahab's  rebel brood who dared divest
As--with a sigh--I deem thou might'st have been to me!
Or again witness what with thee I've seen,
I kick the wee stools o'er the mickle,
Or egg-shells by a cuckoo sucked;
No cuirass glistens on my bosom's swell;
Win to the brow, 'tis his; and if ye trace
The blude red rose at Yule may blaw,
Had felt the cold full sponge to pleasure press'd,
To the o'erhanging sallows: blades of grass
Of looks where common kindness had no part,
Burnt from his winged heels to either ear,
Christ's mighty shrine above His martyr's tomb!
Break amorous through the clouds, as morning breaks,
While she held up her greedy gab
With awe-struck thought, and pitying tears,
And calm, and whispering, and hideous roar
How he does love me! His poor temples beat
Ae night the storm the steeples rocked,
Came swelling forth where little caves were wreath'd
Scotland an' me's in great affliction,
And stockdove-flocks in hurried terrors fly,
A sailor rak'd her fore and aft,
But strength alone though of the Muses born
Yet here I lie in foreign bands
So saw he panting light, and towards it went
Yes, in my boyhood, every joy and pain
The lamp of day, with ill-presaging glare,
How fond to meet, how wae to part,
Looking tranquillity, while falls or nods
That tender mystery, will love the more;
Sophists, Bards, Statesmen, all unquiet things
The raindrops on his [       ] track
How blest the humble cotter's fate!
Now Phoebe, in her midnight reign,
Her fairy form, with more than female grace,
The mother of a moment, o'er thy boy,
down to feel if they were hard, but they melted from my finger. And
So every tale, does this sweet tale of thine.
For oft there sits, between the heap
Rural the place, with cart ruts by dyke side.
Some folk of holiday: nor had they waited
With thousand others down the lane.
Her nestling young that in the elderns lie,
Tho' death in ev'ry shape appear,
Where bramble bushes grew and the daisy gemmed in dew
An' warn him what I winna name,
The toltering bustle of a blundering trot
The dancers quick and quicker flew;
And still they bloom as on the day
And bless our simple lives. My Indian bliss!
Then horn for horn they stretch an' strive,
Then from amaze into delight he fell
Me much delighting as I stroll along
Yet will the leaves soon patter on the ground,
But she wad send the sodger youth
Full many shapes, that shadows were,
"Ye little skelpie-limmer's face!
A full accomplishment! The thing is done,
With household blood and wine, serenely wore
And foes disabled in the brutal fray:
My purse is light, I've far to gang,
Nae mair the grove with airy concert rings,
And friendless solitude, groaning and tears,
With native worth and spotless fame,
Be ever in these arms? in this sweet spot
That kept my spirit in are burst--that I
Good visions in the air,--whence will befal,
That we become a part of what has been,
Mov'd on for many a league; and gain'd, and lost
Like stern Diogenes to mock at men--
The inward fragrance of each other's heart.
Ah! who can e'er forget so fair a being?
Thus strove by fancies vain and crude to clear
Is Saturn's; tell me, if thou hear'st the voice
In every vill, at morning's earliest time,
I've looked on Ida with a Trojan's eye;
Where infamy with sad repentance dwells;
Ambition from their memories, and brim
I then might hae hop'd she wad smil'd upon me!
These hills seem things of lesser dignity;
She's broken her vow, she's broken my heart,
Oh, were yon hills and valleys mine,
And spreads the dim and universal pall
Greeted, as he had known them long before.
Is littleness; that he, who feels contempt
Guardian angels! O protect her,
The wise man to that scorn which wisdom holds
Each more than guessed her master bore the blame.
And aft as chance he comes thee nigh,
But Lord, that Friday I was fou,
Ae night they're mad wi' drink and wh-ring,
Their lot auld Scotland ne'er envies,
The flow'rs shall vie in all their charms
Lorenzo's flush with love.--They pass'd the water
Tinting with silver wan your marble tombs.
Warring sighs and groans I'll wage thee!
And grove and glen with thousand such are rife
I'll sit down o'er my scanty meal,
I read Magnificence where ages pay
Their lids shut longest in a dreamless sleep.
The cowpond once agen, bonny Mary O!
Oh! let that eye, which, wild as the Gazelle's,
Ev'n when the wished end's deny'd,
When summer brought no fears to fright,
May never guid luck be their fa'!
And the low night-breeze waves along the air
And then the shepherd slung him at his back;
A glorious galley,  stem an' stern,
Before the tense string murmur.--To the earth!
Time but th' impression stronger makes,
But first on Sawnie gies a ca',
And there to shut the door alone on singing wind and rain--
That fate is thine--no distant date;
Ay, in the very temple of Delight
In a' the tinsel trash o' state!
Are doomed for Peggy still to wear.
Thrilling liquidity of dewy piping.
Nor was the ominous element unjust,
And pray that never child of Song
D'ye think, said I, this face was made for crying?
Are all that speak his passion there.
The Beadsman, after thousand aves told,
For there thou wilt find Saturn, and his woes.
Rejoice, O Delos, with thine olives green,
The Whigs came o'er us for a curse,
The native feelings strong, the guileless ways;
Sank in her pillow. Shaded was her dream
Felt not more tongue-tied than Endymion.
The pitying heart that felt for human woe;
No one but thee hath heard me blithly sing
Astonish'd, doubly marks its beam,
Here Vanity strums on her idiot lyre;
When o'er the hill the eastern star
And ere the old folks were half willing to stir
That housewives talk of. But the spirit-blow
All stir and strife and life and bustle
The sportsman's joy, the murd'ring cry,
An' either douce or merry tale,
I hinted it; she just replied again--
No, no, you have dismiss'd me; and I go
Gie me the groat again, canny young man;
From low hung branches; little space they stop;
Those dainties made to still an infant's cries:
Haud to the Muse, my dainty Davie:
We are not what we have been, and to deem
Of every ill: the man is yet to come
Of whitest clouds she does her beauty dress,
And muckle mair than ye can mak to through;
To show their purple stars, and bells of amber.
And frae my chamber went wi' speed;
That after many wanderings, many years
Can't see the good which sparrows do.
And proudly shook the bridle too,
The moon that shines above his head
(Like a poor fate-bewilder'd slave,)
All know their own save Hodge who would be first,
'Mong which the nightingales have always sung
With inbred joy until the heart oerflow,
A nymph, to whom all hoofed Satyrs knelt;
Distinct, and visible; symbols divine,
Smiles, glances, sighs, tears, fits, flirtations, airs,
And they beheld, while still Hyperion's name
Whether as heavenly glory bright,
Farewell to the miller's brook and his three bonny daughters;
His sov'reignty, and rule, and majesty;--
Which brought sweet memories to the mind,
(Forgive, forgive, much-wrong'd Montrose!
That thou hast never told thy travels strange.
"'Tis Apollonius sage, my trusty guide
The flint was there, the berries at his head.
Which stung his foes to wrath, which grew from fear
Thy margin and the mountains, dusk, yet clear,
But feels too clumsy and too stiff to run,
He bade me on you press this one word--"think!"
Touch raptur'd!--See how painfully I flow:
I glowr'd as I'd seen a warlock, a warlock,
The woodbine quakes lest boys their flowers should find,
Then up along the town she hies,
For mother she hateth all fellows,
But twa-three draps about the wame
Mischance, mistake, or by neglect,
"Two of us in the church-yard lie,
There is such matter for all feeling:--Man!
As flies the partridge from the brake,
Lovely wee thing, wert thou mine,
And temple more divinely desolate--
And I believe that, soon as I began
Was more to me than laurel shades,
No heels to bear him from the op'ning dun;
Fame lives not in the breath of words,
That sullen gloom was sterling true devotion;
To steal my Basil-pot away from me!"
My father's aye jealous of play,
Silv'ring the untainted gushes of its rill;
Oblivion, and melt out his essence fine
The tappit-hen, gae bring her ben,
But Arno wins us to the fair white walls,
And their hours are old and gray,
But Rome is as the desert--where we steer
And learn to tent the farms wi' me?
The patched-up Idol of enlightened days?
Are those swift moments? Whither are they fled?
No claws to dig, his hated sight to shun;
By Arne delighted, or by Handel madden'd;
And worse, the woes we see not--which throb through
Were I in such a place, I sure should pray
Tam Samson's weel-worn clay here lies,
Fain would he now have joined the dance, the song;
They greeted me that morning I left the English shore.
For all sweet sounds and harmonies; Oh! then,
Art, Glory, Freedom fail, but Nature still is fair.
From simple Catrine, their long-lov'd abode:
Stretch'd out, at ease, beneath a glutinous pine;
Of worms--on battle-plains or listed spot?
The mournful wanderer dreams. Behold! he walks
An' cozie here, beneath the blast,
Ferrara!  in thy wide and grass-grown streets,
And I opened the window to see,
And here and there and everywhere,
God help us! we're but poor--ye'se get but thanks.
Endymion: yet hourly had he striven
"Blow, blow, ye winds, with heavier gust!
When winter rules with boundless power:
Where Peleus' son? whom Hell in vain enthralled.
Of stars, to the lulled lake and mountain-coast,
Close bosom-friend of the maturing sun;
There, in a moment, we may plunge our years
Who had on Baiae's shore reclin'd at ease,
The old man through the inner doors broad-spread;
O steer her up, and be na blate,
Monie a sair daurk we twa hae wrought,
The last of those who o'er the whole earth reigned,
Oh glide, fair stream! for ever so;
An' snoov'd away before the Session;
Now meekly calm, now wild in wrath,
And patient goes to gate or knowly brake,
Could rouse from that fine relish, that high feast.
From heart to heart is stealing,
Is shaken into nothing--but the link
Yet do not so, sweet queen; one torment spar'd,
Shall birdie charm, or floweret smile;
I set me down to pass the time,
His winged minions in close clusters stood,
Wilt thou lay that frown aside,
Than when she was a boast, a marvel, and a show.
And for her eyes: what could such eyes do there
Of the Invisible; even from out thy slime
Since in my arbour I did sing to thee.
Working within him into something dreary,--
But in this page a record will I seek.
She hurried at his words, beset with fears,
He knew not where; and how he would say, _nay_,
We are na fou, we're no that fou,
Keep Sleep aloof: but more than that there came
Turn to whence they sprung before.
I'll gie auld cloven Clootie's haunts
Yield me one leaf of Daphne's deathless plant,
He plods about his toils and reads the news,
Or if bare a--s yet were tax'd;
But, Willie, set your fit to mine,
Its airy goal, haply some bower veils
"I will hope and trust in heaven,
Which forc'd me to begin my tale
Endymion's spirit melt away and thaw
In sudden shout and wild surprise
But twenty fauts ye may hae waur,
Against these plagues he strove in vain; for Fate
But, for the general award of love,
Deceiving on and still deceiving;
Round the pond the martins flirt,
A thousand may be guided if they will:
I'd break her spirit, or I'd break her heart;
I curs'd them a', and tun'd my pipe
Foul Superstition! howsoe'er disguised,
With a deaf heart which never seemed to be
Flung from the rock, on Ocean's foam, to sail
What force or guile could not subdue,
When Youth itself survives young Love and Joy?
But, though I say't, for maids thus veigled in
To sing how Nannie lap and flang,
In some auld tree, or eldritch tow'r,
Sheltered the water from the wind,
And hear him bawl to every passer by
If, like a tower upon a headlong rock,
God Neptune's palaces!" With noise increas'd,
The life-blood equal sucks of Right and Wrong:
But he wad stan't, as glad to see him,
Beneath the sun, beneath the moon,
And, in its middle space, a sky that never lowers.
Green fields and every pleasant place;
I left my honest parents, the church clock and the village;
And he and I must part,--so let it be,--
Against his better self, he took delight
The sighs by beauty's magic stirred
We saw thee shine in youth and beauty's pride,
Thine be ilka joy and treasure,
It reach'd the Ship, it split the bay;
And prime old Tusser in his homely trim,
And shed its perfuming and bloom on thy breast.
Then Love took wing, and from his pinions shed
My long captivity and moanings all
With over pleasure--many, many more,
Charlie Gregor tint his plaidie,
With clapping noise to startle birds away,
*       *       *       *       *
And through it moan'd a ghostly under-song,
Tho' thou has been false, I'll ever prove true,
And cheer each fresh'ning flower.
With shawl-girt head and ornamented gun,
And crowns, and turbans. With unladen breasts,
But he may say he's bought her, O!
Let her form sae fair and faultless,
That day the Duke ne'er saw, Jamie.
"I thought to find my Johnny here,
Armed warriors, waiting neither suns nor showers,
For mony a beast to dead she shot,
Or be by phantoms duped. O destiny!
Of flowers yet fresh with childhood; on the ear
I like a blockhead boost to ride,
Is most articulate; where hopes infest;
It maks guid fellows girn an' gape,
O' clans frae woods, in tartan duds,
The blaze, the splendor, and the symmetry,
Petrarch, outstepping from the shady green,
Nor at each other gaz'd, but heavily
Is't not enough, Unhappy Thing! to know
Though sadly scoffed at by the circumcised,
And chang'd with every moon my love,
Wha spied I but my ain dear maid,
And sink thus low! but I will ease my breast
Rousing the turbid torrent's roar,
And thou, too, perish, Pompey? have ye been
Yes--all such reasonings are amiss!
Put on with speed your woodland dress,
Their surly eyes brow-hidden, heavy paws
They were not eagles, nourished with the day;
With little kindness would to me incline.
But Oliphant aft made her yell,
How softly on the Spanish shore she plays!
Sparkle in Jenny's e'e, and flush her cheek,
I shall again see Phoebus in the morning:
Tiptoe with white arms spread. He, sick to lose
Though thine's the blame, said he
And threw their moving shadows on the walls,
I wad nae gie a button for her.
A faith whose martyrs are the broken heart,--
To the blue dwelling of divine Urania:
Th' increasing blast roared round the beetling rocks,
"An' may they never learn the gaets
Were deepest dungeons; heaths and sunny glades
The pigeons nestled round the cote
Ere the Frank robber turn him from his spoil,
The Palaces of Nature, whose vast walls
Or holding dark communion with the Cloud
The anchor of my purest thoughts, the nurse,
Since the black clouds betoken nought but wet;
Peasants bring forth in safety.--Can it be,
And spreads her sheets o' daisies white
To view the ocean wide and bright,
Where sad Penelope o'erlooked the wave;
Because (ye need na tak it ill)
The lass that made the bed to me.
The sky turned black as midnight and a sudden storm came on--
The last Halloween I was waukin
His hat slouched down, and great coat buttoned close
And conscience her tortures appease,
"My body and soul to be still."
My heart wad burst wi' anguish.
Forgets there's Care upo' the earth.
For puppies like you there's but few.
A very nothing would have power to wean
And pipes her "tweet tut" fears the whole day long.
And catch her ilka glance o' love,
From all the world considers joy or care,
And marvel where the spoil could have appeared.
My rustling steps awhile their joys deceive,
More, more he gaz'd: his human senses reel:
Ne'er summer-sun was half sae sweet.
And purge the ether of our enemies;
And tak a share wi' those that bear
The day is come when I again repose
A trifle scarce worthy your care;
There is a thorn; it looks so old,
When the shades of evening creep
But bending in a thousand graceful ways;
O why, while fancy raptured, slumbers,
"We are twin brothers in this destiny!
Wide-scattered hoof-marks dint the wounded ground;
The infant Alps, which--had I not before
A blending of all beauties; streams and dells,
An' just a wee drap sp'ritual burn in,
Close by its home, and dogs are barking there;
Thy shrine, thy grove, thy oracle, thy heat
Then old songs waken from enclouded tombs;
To shed before his Shrine the blood he deems most sweet.
Fair tho' she be, that was ne'er my undoing:
On little objects with like firmness fixed;
If thou'rt a slave, indulge thy sneers.
And onward went upon his high employ,
May every true brother of the compass and square
Five bonnie lasses round their table,
For wheresoe'er the shrieking victim hath
And Europe's bulwark 'gainst the Ottomite;
O'erpowered me--it sank. Then 'gan abate
Till in some miry slough he sunk is,
And in my head a dull, dull pain;
Each in its cauld hand held a light--
Less than it feels, because the weapon which it wields
And by yon garden green, again;
Beneath thy silver-gleaming ray,
O! for a throat like huge Mons-meg,
An' ye wha leather rax an' draw,
Thy thunder, conscious of the new command,
Up wimpling stately Tweed I've sped,
Standest alone--with nothing like to thee--
"Friendship! mysterious cement of the soul!
To that large utterance of the early Gods!
Farewell, dear friend! may guid luck hit you,
Like Scipio buried by the upbraiding shore:
A stern and stalwart ghaist arise,
The armaments which thunderstrike the walls
She's down i' the grove, she's wi' a new love!
Stumble o'er heaving plains--and Man's dread hath no words.
To all my empire: farewell sad I took,
Followed by brindled dog that snuffs the ground
The stolen turnip as he goes along;
The purple Midnight veiled that mystic meeting
To rouse the mountain deer, my jo;
And in the morning, when the tempest drops,
Disguising oft the wretch of human kind,
Went likewise, and when he returned to Spain,
With many more, the brawniest in assault,
Sudden from heaven like a weeping cloud,
The promis'd father's tender name;
The braw lass made the bed to me:
The rough burr-thistle, spreading wide
But the tender heart o' leesome luve,
Which comes upon the silence, and dies off,
Would build up all her triumphs in one dome,
"Sweet babe! they say that I am mad,
In order, on the clean hearth-stane,
And listen'd in sharp pain for Saturn's voice.
And time is setting with me, Oh!
A land of Souls beyond that sable shore,
Though from thy heights no more one Muse will wave her wing.
Mourn, ilka grove the cushat kens!
The suncrackt upland's russet swells adorns.
The wars are o'er, and I'm come hame,
I'll be a Brig, when ye're a shapeless cairn!
Twas joy to think of dreams by day,
But I maun lie before the storm,
And Anarchy assumed her attributes;
His palace lost--and to this day
There sings unto himself for joy's amends,
"And in the church-yard cottage, I
Beyond the reach of music: for the choir
Right, Sir! your text I'll prove it true,
Which is its own great judge and searcher out,
Bear, know, feel--and yet breathe--into _one_ word,
Yet to the beauteous form he was not blind,
And from this one, this single ewe,
From light to dark when toil could yield
But, Duncan, gin ye'll keep your aith--
Receive the truth, and let it be your balm."
Or else, neglecting a' that's guid,
Which now beneath them, but above shall grow
How glorious Wallace stood, how hapless fell?
I sleepless lie frae e'en to morn,
Quick waterflies and gnats were sporting still,
Of over thinking had that moment gone
When Jockey's owsen hameward ca'.
I thank'd her for her courtesie;
Shall only fade to change to fruit.
Where muses play on golden strings
And thou, the thunder-stricken nurse of Rome!
And cheerlie blinks the ingle-gleed
Strive for her son to seize my careless heart;
Within its own creation, or in thine,
I may not be thy love: I am forbidden--
Green paddocks have but little charms
Has placed a golden cuirass there;
Bitter in dool I lickit my winnins,
But all the soul of Music's self was heard,
To rustic Agriculture did bequeath
Whom friends and fortune quite disown!
As market-days are wearing late,
Though here awhile he learned to moralise,
I thought them something like yoursel'.
In such wise, in such temper, so aloof
The forests are leafless, the meadows are brown,
That when through heavy hours I used to rue
While faithless snaws ilk step betray
About her majesty, and front death-pale,
Upon some mountain-top until I feel
When in an antichamber every guest
Shame fa' the fun; wi' sword and gun
Till piper lads were wae and weary;
The beam pours in--for Time and Skill will couch the blind.
'Tween Inverness and Tiviotdale,
"Now, if this earthly love has power to make
Ah! when a soul doth thus its freedom win,
To one who in this lonely isle hath been
Of luxury, and my young spirit follow
And little feel boys oer their heads can stray.
Spreads awfully before me. How much toil!
Mind to be kind to ane anither.
Tak this excuse for nae epistle.
Which found no mortal resting-place so fair
For God sake, sirs, then speak her fair,
About the lords o' the creation.
Invisible but gazing, as I glow--
Embroidered with many a spring peering flower?
Delighting much, to see it half at rest,
And drown the wakeful anguish of the soul.
Yes: now I am no longer wretched thrall,
An set weel down a shapely shank,
Sought when a shepherd Salem's springs,
Grew up like organ, that begins anew
And if amidst a scene, a shock so rude,
An' cut you up wi' ready slight,
The Spirit mourn'd "Adieu!"--dissolv'd, and left
No flow'rs gaily springing, nor birds sweetly singing,
He'd ne'er cast saut upo' thy tail.--
Melting into its radiance, we blend,
The gentle heart, as northern blasts do roses;
She sees his pale corse on the plain, Oh!
Or how can I gang brisk and braw,
He left his bed, and took his wayward rout,
His hunting feats have him bereft
I've thought how richer folks were blest
The Turk--the Greek--the Albanian--and the Moor,
They dazzle our een as they flee to our hearts.
If Betty fifty ponds should see,
Will leave their moonlight meadow-rings,
Fearless come, you're welcome here;
The day drags through though storms keep out the sun;
The puzzling mystery he would gladly cheat,
Full of light, incense, tender minstrelsy,
Why westward turn? 'Twas but to say adieu!
They keep his dust in Arqua,  where he died--
She whisper'd Rob to leuk for't:
Or did ye stay to give a welcoming
Fair reader, at the old tale take a glance,
To overbear and crumble this to nought?
Blue hare-bells lightly, and where prickly furze
'For wine, for wine we left our kernel tree;
By the love-glances of unlovely eyes,
But let me quit Man's works, again to read
Rejoice, ye birring patricks a';
There's ane; come forrit, honest Allan!
Leap kindly back to kindness, though Disgust
And in that fatal tempest the whole ship's crew were lost.
Here's a health to them that's awa,
A smile was on his countenance; he seem'd,
Hard as his toil, and ever slow to speak,
That gin the lassie winna do't,
Confounds rule and law, reconciles contradiction--
But one thing want these banks of Rhine,--
These sepulchres of cities, which excite
That luckless meets him in his morning's rout.
Without the aid of love; yet in content
He passed bleak Pindus, Acherusia's lake,
Feel we these things?--that moment have we stept
I ken they scorn my low estate,
But ne'er didst thou, fair Mount! when Greece was young,
Could glimmer on their tears; where their own groans
At length it comes among the forest oaks,
That he was cold and very chill:
The mouldy crust and falling bone to catch.
She almost has o'erturned the horse,
Shall the dear babe, upon its mother's breast,
And owre this grassy heap sing dool,
All day, my ready tomb the ocean-flood--
So it went the common road to decay.
He would swear, for all his oaks,
His look and bending figure, all bespeak
And a' the glory shall be thine,
That each at other look'd half staringly;
Thou, silent form, dost tease us out of thought
Her slander bothers everybody's door.
As trembling U stood staring all aghast,
For his was not that open, artless soul
Its gifts, transferring fame as fleeting too!--
Hear me, my mother Earth! behold it, Heaven!--
Where Courage falls in her despairing files,
Would he had ne'er returned to find fresh cause to roam!
And they were simply gordian'd up and braided,
So in that crystal place, in silent rows,
To one who has been long in city pent,
O, I am full of gladness! Sisters three,
Strike for the Cretan isle; and here thou art!
Before three swiftest kisses he had told,
So loving brother don't forget to write
The blood is nectar:--but what doth she there,
Fareweel the bonnie banks of Ayr,
My pilgrimage for the world's dusky brink.
Let prudence number o'er each sturdy son
Then gae your gate, ye'se nae be here!--
"Among the ghosts, his own undoing;
Who but deplores that hapless friend?
But come what will, I've sworn it still,
There I'll spend the day wi' you,
As for the lass, lascivious body,
The Hell of Waters! where they howl and hiss,
As Tammie glowr'd, amaz'd, and curious,
Oh, Time! the Beautifier of the dead,
The silver strings of heavenly harp atween:
An' how they crowded to the yill,
Through all that day I've felt a greater pleasure
Wha, by Castalia's wimplin' streamies,
Or sigh'd, or blush'd, or on spring-flowered lea
An' when the New Light billies see them,
With the base purple of a court oppress'd,
So many, and so many, and such glee?
On life's rough ocean luckless starr'd!
Their gun's a burden on their shouther;
Frowns o'er the wide and winding Rhine,
And still the more and more they drank,
Pictur'd in western cloudiness, that takes
A different lore: we may not thus profane
Tho' it were ten thousand mile.
Than mightier heroes of a longer date.
"In rain, in tempest, and in snow,
Where he became a being,--whose desire
Till my frail frame return to whence it rose,
That crimson rose, how sweet and fair!
She's swingein' through the city;
Startles the wild bee from the fox-glove bell.
White hawthorn, and the pastoral eglantine;
Dost thou not hear my heart?--Awake! thou shalt, and must.
Dares down as soon as magpies' nests are found,
So close, you'd say that they were bent
And I had done an hellish thing
Remembrance! as we glide along,
Her cheeks are leaves of roses spread,
Like the Chaldean, he could watch the stars,
Where human weakness has come short,
Enriched from ancestral merchandize,
Young Jamie, pride of a' the plain,
But owre my left shouther I gae him a blink,
Which, thus much we are sure, must lie decayed;
There be more things to greet the heart and eyes
There was a winsome wench and walie,
And in his lap a book, the which he conn'd
But ca' them out to park or hill,
But ever and anon of griefs subdued
Of silken bonnet-strings--and utters sigh
Ev'n you on murd'ring errands toil'd,
But once, once, once again--" At this he press'd
The water which beside it stood;
"They'll both be here before eleven."
And frowning like a wolf on all beside;
My youthfu' heart was stown away,
Its slightest touches, instant pause--
Fresh garlands: for sweet music has been heard
Even as you list invite your many guests;
Or the pure bosom of its nursing Lake,
Up then bespake the fair Whitefoord,
And ay the ale was growing better:
Where sailors gang to fish for cod.
Sung in the orchard trees for half the day;
While loud the trump's heroic clang,
Points to the parents fondling o'er their child?
With passions so potent, and fancies so bright,
To ken what French mischief was brewin';
Their eyes on honoured forms, whose busts around them close.
Leaving us fancy-sick. No, no, I'm sure,
Sore traversed in whate'er he bought and sold:
But seas between us braid hae roar'd,
As light as the air, and fause as thou's fair,
With these what Tory warriors clos'd.
She likes--as lambkins like a knife.
Like to a moving vintage down they came,
That bears the name o' Auld King Coil,
Ask me no more! I may not utter it,
Upon all space: space starr'd, and lorn of light;
The silent thought, nor from his lips did come
An' Auld Light caddies bure sic hands,
Circles round in winding whirls,
(Nature is adverse to a cripple's rest;)
When lintwhites chant amang the buds,
Dolly, singing, milks her cows;
Of amorous herbs and flowers, newly reap'd
Some sort all our qualities each to its tribe,
A heaven he lost erewhile: it must--it must
He with light steps went up a western hill,
Up to his forehead. Then there was a hum
And even children lisp the Rights of Man;
Hung o'er his hurdies wi' a swirl.
Mere things of form, with nought of fear.
In lovely modesty, and virtues rare.
And tho' I hae nae meikle tocher;
Because we stang'd her through the place,
I wantoned with thy breakers--they to me
When Vengeance draws the sword in wrath,
Her robe assume its vernal hues,
Let those guns so unerring such vengeance forego?
And wander their way to the devil!
No more I shrink appall'd, afraid;
I do confess thee sweet, but find
_Scans all the depths of magic, and expounds
The Janus glance  of whose significant eye,
And care neer comes to steal a single joy.
No more delight--I bid adieu to all.
Bubbles a pipe; fine sounds are floating wild
The foamy stream deep-roaring fa's,
What tho' on hamely fare we dine,
When Albion's lessening shores could grieve or glad mine eye.
Glasses itself in tempests; in all time,
Through beesom, ling, and teazel burrs
When other things are parched beside
The wild colt only turns around to stare
Duncan fleech'd, and Duncan pray'd,
But only, lest we gang to hell,
Numerous as shadows haunting fairily
What needs this din about the town o' Lon'on,
In years, have marked him with a tiger's tooth;
Thickest night, surround my dwelling!
Of all its music! And I know a grove
An' sklent on poverty their joke
And feeling still with thee in my crushed feelings' dearth.
Sturdy he seemed, though he was sad;
On scarce a bellyfu' o' drummock,
To her fair works did nature link
With desolation, and a broken claim:
Since she did pass this place.--
A gentle empire o'er fraternal souls.
Awful and sudden--and the cables felt the shock;
And dew-drops twinkle o'er the lawn;
But had you seen the philibegs,
He seem'd as he wi' Time had warstl'd lang,
And like a hawk from covert sprung,
But while we sing, "God save the King,"
There a big-bellied bottle still eases my care.
"My care, if the arm of the mighty were mine,
'Till 'tween the late and early,
Sometimes it gives a glory to the voice,
That sober reason turns an ape,
Scarce would you deem that Saragoza's tower
Farewell to the weedy nook, hemmed in by waters;
Yet for this want more noted, as of yore
Five wighter carlins were na found
And little praise with thee hath been;
To unperplex bliss from its neighbour pain;
With 'haviour soft. Sleep yawned from underneath.
Her skin is as white as leprosy,
Thine is a scene alike where souls united
Can mak' the bodies unco happy;
High genitors, unconscious did they cull
Ran the dark veins, that none but feet divine
Then up he gets and off he sets
Peona guiding, through the water straight,
Whose good intents take errors in their plan.
Hereditary Bondsmen! know ye not
And smug apprentice gulp their weekly air:
It was a nymph uprisen to the breast
She fuff't her pipe wi' sic a lunt,
Where other hearts are sick of the same bruise;
And from the glossy elm tree takes
He circled round the magic ground,
Part of its immortality--the veil
There must be too a ruin dark, and gloomy,
Or of some hermit's cave, where by his fire
The friend of man, the friend of truth;
Let their bleached bones, and blood's unbleaching stain,
Ilk star gae hide thy twinkling ray,
And, O! may heaven their simple lives prevent
While the lingering moments are number'd by care?
By the blear-eyed nations in empurpled vests,
Th' abodes of covey'd grouse and timid sheep,
For joy his head and heels are idle,
From mountain-cliff to coast descending sombre down.
Where he was mirror'd small in paradise,
The breezes were ethereal, and pure,
Sharp shivers thro' the leafless bow'r;
Like whispers of the household gods that keep
Nor claim a passing sigh, because it told for _whom!_
Devotion's ev'ry grace, except the heart!
With fruit the vines that round the thatch-eves run;
"Now, honest Hughoc, dinna fail
No joyless forms shall regulate
'Twad been o'er meikle to gien thee mair--
Thy spirit in the wonders I shall tell.
But now the evening curdles dank and grey,
In frightful scarlet, and its thorns out-grown
Through life to dwell delighted here;
The diamond path? And does it indeed end
More strange, more beautiful, more smooth, more regal,
But ay fu' han't is fechtin best,
To think what sermons the old vicar made,
And round that neck entwine her!
With milk-white crest, gold spur, and light-poised lance,
His aged head, crowned with beechen wreath,
We'll gar our streams an' burnies shine
That Martha Ray about this time
And gave her heart my posies, all cropt in a sunny hour,
And blood of earth flow on as they have flowed,
O Logan, sweetly didst thou glide,
Thou movest--but increasing with the advance,
And Love and Prayer unite, or rule the hour by turns.
Yet did she merely weep--her gentle soul
O'er many a winding dale and painful steep,
Hae, there's my haun, I wiss you weel,
Wee Davock hauds the nowt in fother.
Went, spiritual, through the damsel's hand;
And leave a black memorial on the sand?
To such as see thee not my words were weak;
When the gallant game was play'd,
Pours with the lustre of a falling star.
For clever de'ils he'll mak' them.
Bluster'd, and slept, and its wild self did teaze
I slowly sail, scarce knowing my intent;
Oft have ye heard my canty strains:
Mix'd with some warbler's dying fall,
An' there will be Collieston's  whiskers,
Darkness, and worms, and shrouds, and sepulchres
Goddess! I have beheld those eyes before,
Blest into mother, in the innocent look,
Who sung his rhymes in Coila's plains
Or down Italian vista startles,
Below the Kirk, below the Hill,
Onward he goes--he stops--his bosom beats
Sic flights are far beyond her pow'r;
And smile as thou were wont to do?
And surely she who now so fondly rears
Where with thy silver bow and arrows keen
I found me; by my fresh, my native home.
And often marked her, as discoursing deep,
Tho' hardly he, for sense or lear,
The Spectres whom no exorcism can bind,--
They went till unobscur'd the porches shone;
Till, weary, he sat down before the maw
What from this barren being do we reap?
His face is fair and fresh to see;
And the rain rains down frae his red bleer'd ee--
I partly owe to him: and thus, the chimes
How fair and how pure is the lily,
Abjuring their democrat doings,
And colour things to come with hues of Night;
Death takes him hame to gie him quarters.
The pyramid of Empires pinnacled,
Their nights unquiet, lang an' restless;
And now what lands between us lie,
Knelt to receive those accents halcyon.
The fire which we endure --it was repaid
He stood behind a bush of elder,
And pours his vengeance in the burning line,
Through the old garden-ground of boyish days.
And by old Rhadamanthus' tongue of doom,
Nor ask so dear a breast to feel one pang for _mine_.
In shape, that sure no living man had thought
For I have ever thought that it might bless
On trembling string or vocal air,
Knows not the beauty he possesses.
"The auld gudeman, or the young gudeman,
Of an enamoured Goddess, and the cell
Lopped heads as high as bushes are;
She answer'd me right saucilie,
Or where in Pluto's gardens palatine
My own dear will, 'twould be a deadly bane."--
The sultry suns of summer came,
"Yes! let the rich deride, the proud disdain,
Then busy, busy are his hours--
Presumptuous, in thus venturing to be heard."
Of luxuries: yet I must not forget
Gude faith, she'll soon o'er-gang ye.
This day thou metes three score eleven,
The music, yearning like a God in pain,
Unmatch'd at the bottle, unconquer'd in war,
He stills them into mutual friends;
Their deaths were dew-drops on Heaven's amaranth bower,
Say, maiden, wilt thou go with me
Whither fled Lamia, now a lady bright,
Reaping the whirlwind from the oft-sown winds;
Thou leddest Orpheus through the gleams of death;
Quarrel with the proud forests it hath fed,
With zebras striped, and sleek Arabians' prance,
Intrigue with the specious chaos, and dispart
The bees seemed singing ballads oer,
And ear still busy on its nightly watch,
She draiglet a' her petticoatie,
Slowly the sounds came back again
To mingle with the Universe,  and feel
And still below, the horrid cauldron boils--
Thine friendship's truest heart.
Such were the bloody Circus' genial laws,
As guileful Fraud points out the erring way:
Folks tell me that the May's in flower,
Know, prudent, cautious self-control,
Seems at the distance like a crescent moon:
That press the soul, or wring the mind with anguish,
Round flowery islands, and take thence a skim
But yet, what-reck, he, at Quebec,
Instead of the Cross the Albatross
So she was gently glad to see him laid
Of peaceful sway above man's harvesting,
Up heaping through the slab: refreshment drowns
The visions of the earth were gone and fled--
And then he stretched his arms, how wild!
It burns my heart I must depart,
And canst oppose to each malignant hour
Wi' mair o' horrible and awfu',
Found way from forth the thunders round his head!
How many ties did that stern moment tear!
The Earth to them was as a rolling bark
Which robed our idols, and we see too sure
Even as thou vanishest so I shall die.
Faint through his careless arms; content to see
The hedger hastens from the storm begun,
Now think, ye farmers all, I pray,
High wields her balance and her rod;
Whereat the star of Lethe not delay'd
I backward mused on wastet time,
From place to place, and following at chance,
How royal George, the Lord leuk o'er him!
While the sun and thou arise to bless the day.
"O Prince! O Chief of many throned Pow'rs,
High mountains are a feeling, but the hum
From their poor breasts went sueing to her ear
Flit like a ghost away."--"Ah, Gossip dear,
The Highland hills I've wander'd wide,
But now she's floating down the Nith,
Unsheathing their own knobs of tawny flowers
And sic a Lord!--lang Scotch ells twa,
And bracelets too, and fragrant zone,
Are clothed with early blossoms--through the grass
Where that same treacherous wax began to run,
And all his skill in horsemanship,
Obstinate silence came heavily again,
His face was furrow'd o'er with years,
And stand a wall of fire around their much-lov'd Isle.
To lay strong hold for help on bounteous Graham.
Nor could, the same supremacy have neared,
I pray thee have no fear of me,
With our kind love and could Gip write and all
The silver lamp,--the ravishment,--the wonder--
And torrents, swoll'n to rivers with their gore,
A' ye wha live by sowps o' drink,
And up she threw the window sash,
And a needle and thread with a little good skill
A jutting crag, and oft' I ran,
Which if _I_ have not taken for the sake--
The bolstered steed beneath the shed of thatch,
Starts into voice a moment, then is still.
Still, if some patron's gen'rous care he trace,
Is thy face like thy mothers, my fair child!
Those green-rob'd senators of mighty woods,
The present marred with reason gone,
Our warlock Rhymer instantly descry'd
I wish her sale for her gude ale,
She'll wander by the aiken tree,
And other spirits there are standing apart
Here, your earth-born souls still speak
Its flowery slopes, its river's crystal swell,
Altho' thou maun never be mine,
Oh timid love, more fond than free,
But Jenny's jimps and jirkinet,
Whether to weeds or flowers; but for me,
And the sick west continually bereaves
And the blacksmith he threw off his apron and swore
Sounds sweet as if a Sister's voice reproved,
Or of the dead leaves rustling drearily,
The kind love that's in her e'e.
Thus ending loudly, as he would o'erleap
"Thou art the man! Now shall I lay my head
Who marked the weight of each fat sheep and ox,
Climes, fair withal as ever mortal head
Tho' mankind were a pack o' cartes,
But life of happier sort to me pourtrayed,
The wretch, already crushed low
And at the blacksmith's shop his hour will stand
The path, and leave a wall on either side.
Some, lucky, find a flow'ry spot,
What will I do gin my Hoggie die?
And most forlorn upon that widow'd bed
But hath it nothing of eternal kin?
In Love's delightful fetters she chains the willing soul!
And thence full many a sound she hears,
Like this of mine, then would I fearless turn
My soul of any rest: yet must I hence:
And languish'd there three days. Ye milder powers,
Shed dainty perfumes and give honey food
The sheep when hunger presses sore
For ae blink o' the bonnie burdies!
On Royce Wood seemed a sweeter tune.
Then fareweel vacant careless roamin';
Deceived by its gigantic elegance--
The Midland Ocean breaks on him and me,
Are springs the common springs?
The Roman Globe--for, after, none sustained,
On my ain legs thro' dirt and dub,
And ev'ry bird thy requiem sings;
These are four minds, which, like the elements,
Once consecrated to the sepulchre.
With other pageants: but this fair unknown
Had he left more forlorn; for the first time,
Where beats the human heart, as if just there,
It faints and withers, and is done.
Young traveller, in such a mournful place?
He sought her where she might have been
Smiling, thus whisper'd: "Though from upper day
Ye surly sumphs, who hate the name,
The mair I kiss she's ay my dearie.
In grief thy sallow mantle tear:
Yon centinel stars; and he who listens to it
Above, around, and at his feet; save things
Dazzled to trace it in the sunny skies.
Upreared of human hands. Come, and compare
But he still was faithfu' to his clan,
Behold!"--Two copious tear-drops instant fell
There was a day when they were young and proud;
Mingled with fragrance from her rarest flowers:
Old Gip lies on the hearth stone every night
Winters that withered all the green
The twa appear'd like sisters twin,
Through views more dazzling unto mortal ken
They waste sae mony a braw estate!
Won from the gaze of many centuries:
Yet often have I, on the brink of tears,
Nature, well pleas'd, pronounc'd it very good;
And pray, a' guid things may attend you!
Farewell, the bonnie banks of Ayr!
Blest be the hour she cool'd in her linens,
To meet all trouble from his brutish hands,
Its eloquent proportions, and unroll
We gazed with terror on the gloomy sleep
I own it's past my comprehension.
If he some scheme, like tea an' winnocks,
Proclaim thee Nature's varied favourite now:
Till some ane by his bonnet lays,
In human climes, and live: Alas! poor youth,
That buzz about our slumbers, like brain-flies,
His day of double victory and death
Sending, like blood-hounds from the slip,
Who can avenge so well a leader's fall?
The horrid crags, by toppling convent crowned,
Vanity of vanities, all is vanity.--_Solomon_
Eas'd in one accent his o'er-burden'd soul,
A cow and a cauf, a yowe and a hauf,
This seven lang years I hae lien by his side,
Memphis, and Babylon, and Nineveh.
For very idleness? Where'er thou art,
The chains lie silent on the footworn stones;--
Or with a finger stay'd Ixion's wheel.
My sports were lonely, 'mid continuous roars,
For what a height my spirit is contending!
Shall view us as Victors, or view us no more!
Now deil-ma-care about their jaw,
Odd zooks, said a gipsey, with bellows to mend,
The minister kiss'd the fiddler's wife,
That with the hope of plenty leans
I sit and count my sins by chapters;
To crush the imperial urn, whose ashes slept sublime,
The _caput mortuum_ of gross desires
I had a splendid dream of thee last night:
The seal is set.--Now welcome, thou dread Power!
Yet brought him to the meekness of a child:
On barren souls. Great Muse, thou know'st what prison,
An' she has twa sparkling roguish een.
The village-bell has told the hour--
He saw her days were near-hand ended,
Which gay dramatic tastes admire.
About the great Athenian admiral's mast?
He loved the daisy-covered ground,
There's neither Johnny nor his horse,
So noted for drowning of sorrow and care;
With convuls'd clenches waving it abroad,
The moor-cock springs, on whirring wings,
An' there will be gay Cassencarrie,
And did na joy blink in her e'e,
These might have been her destiny--but no--
Immortal tear-drops down the thunderer's beard;
They've ta'en a weapon, long and sharp,
And twittering on the chimney light.
The wind seems calling, though not understood.
"There's ither poets much your betters,
Gramercy! they for joy did grin
A bonnier fleesh ne'er cross'd the clips
And she can see a mile of road,
Mingle, and so become a part of it,--
Was brought to the court of our good Scottish king,
Who from the feathery gold of evening lean:--
To count her horns with a' my pow'r,
They mak enow themsels to vex them;
"Young stranger, whither wand'rest thou?"
And little molehills round about it,
And bear it with me, as the rushing wind
And blythe be the bird that sings on her grave.
And when the moon her pallid face discloses,
Till three noble chieftains, and all of his blood,
Adown the glitt'ring stream they featly danc'd;
And heaven of all her stars and moon,
And the groundlark left his nest like a neighbour which I knew.
May they rejoice, no wanderer lost,
With but one weakest weakness--Vanity--
And many else were free to roam abroad,
Can see they don't come honest by.
As two close Hebrews in that land inspired,
I've seen thee dappl't, sleek, and glaizie,
O Tam! hadst thou but been sae wise,
Poor Father! gone was every friend of thine:
"Sisters and brothers, little maid,
The night drave on wi' sangs an' clatter;
Shall venal lays their pompous exit hail?
To bring a doctor from the town,
When we began to tire of childish play
Might well itself be deemed of dignity,
With crags, whereon those Moorish turrets rest,
But now whereon a thousand keels did ride
Though sluggards deem it but a foolish chase,
I've heard my reverend Graunie say,
Who, pouring here a[3] _later_ ditty,
The feather from the raven's breast
Upon the lore so voluble and deep,
And left without a sigh the land of War and Crimes.
She neer so much as mentioned things to come,
Nay, whirring from the tortured string,
Starting the traveller to a quicker pace
Wi' double plenty o'er the loanin
The death o' devils smoor'd wi' brimstone reek
Has auld Kilmarnock seen the deil?
The roofs that we fired, and the plunder we shared,
With emulous taste, that vulgar deed annoys;
They, round the ingle, form a circle wide;
When Athens' children are with hearts endued,
Fair, on a sloping green of mossy tread,
Why am I loth to leave this earthly scene?
Grave, tideless-blooded, calm and cool,
And for earth's glories throw the heavens away,
Thus whispering, his warm, unnerved arm
That coft contentment, peace, or pleasure;
Her looks were calm, her senses clear.
No! though his artless strains he rudely sings,
Could find no refuge from distress,
But steal me a blink o' your bonnie black e'e,
Yet church receives him every sabbath day
So may his flock increase, and grow
Now thou's turn'd out, for a' thy trouble,
I'd bubble up the water through a reed;
Thou young-eyed Spring, gay in thy verdant stole,
The comfortable sun. I was athirst
Their graves are growing green to see:
Wherein lies happiness? In that which becks
There no forced banquet claims the sated guest,
Through me the shepherd realm shall prosper well;
While in thy leaves his early nest was made.
Sin' thou was my guid-father's Meere;
Meander gave me,--for I bubbled up
Hath cut rude flights of stairs
Till Robert, the Lord of the Cairn and the Scaur,
You would have said, if you had met her,
And fiercely by the arm he shook her,
Wi' man and nature leagu'd my foes,
May we together pass, and calmly try
But, vanquished by himself, to his own slaves a slave--
He clench'd his pamphlets in his fist,
He seems, I think, the rein to give;
And not met with twopence to purchase a pot.
And Freedom's stranger-tree grow native of the soil!
From hawthorn hedge and orchard come;
Who marked each element's border;
When the bee sips in the bean, and grey willow branches lean,
Bless Cynthia's face, the enthusiast's friend:
Presumptuous against love, against the sky,
But winter finds it when she leaves
Here's a health to them that's awa,
Where are those bloody Banners which of yore
Fair maid, you need not take the hint,
The lonely turret, shatter'd, and outworn,
Lo! how they murmur, laugh, and smile, and weep:
The Lord preserve us frae the devil,
In one whose brow had no dark veins to swell.
Of earth's splenetic fire, dully drop
And can ye thus unfriended leave me?
Hath weaned it from all worldlings: thus he felt,
His lengthen'd chin, his turn'd-up snout,
Astonish'd! confounded! cry'd Satan, "By ----,
And emptied on't a black dull-gurgling phial:
And weave their web again; some, bowed and bent,
Fancy, high-commission'd:--send her!
As Mailie, an' her lambs thegither,
But, first an' foremost, I should tell,
Far from the fiery noon, and eve's one star,
Yet strength was pillared in each massy aisle.
She danc'd along with vague, regardless eyes,
His sovereign virtues--still we Trajan's  name adore.
For seldom did she go to chapel-shrift,
An' whyles twalpennie worth o' nappy
That crowds, and hurries, and precipitates
Or fields, where bee-fly greets
The few in number, who had not o'erstept
He mutters, glowrin' at the bitches,
Its sanctuary the while the usurping Moslem prayed;
Which I would seize, in passing, to beguile
Young Harry heard what she had said,
Stranger! to justly show that brow,
"Thou smooth-lipp'd serpent, surely high inspired!
Her silver light the boughs amang;
I see ye're complimented thrang,
"My son, these maxims make a rule,
And as in Beauty's bower he pensive sate,
To ask him where her Basil was; and why
Cold is the heart, fair Greece! that looks on Thee,
Her own lute thou wilt see: no time to spare,
Who violent hands upon themselves have laid,
And hiving wisdom with each studious year,
"I'm going upon the green to play:
She spoilt her half-done broidery with the same.
And not a muse in honest grief bewail?
And shaped his weapon with an edge severe,
Those happy scenes when far awa'.
Poor devil! see him owre his trash,
But now he's banish'd far away,
Gude keep thee frae a tether string!
Full many a pang, and many a throe,
With "Kirchup! Kirchup!" mong the wheats
I wandered all sorrowing thinking of thee,--
The Autumn mourns her rip'ning corn,
Are in her eyes less happy than the tomb?
Which envious Eld forbore, and tyrants left to stand.
She wadna trow't, the browst she brew'd
'Twas not her golden ringlets bright;
Wad be my queen, wad be my queen.
Twin imps the meanwhile bawling at her back;
Tho' the wee cot-house should haud me;
But few can equal the fair maid of France.
What herd like Russell tell'd his tale,
To keep that right inviolate's the fashion,
I love at early morn, from new mown swath,
Who from Olympus watch our destinies!
With pity, for the grey-hair'd creature wept.
Reigning knight-errant oer this dirty breed--
The worshipper and demon of despair,
Yet shows of what she was, when shell and ball
Have left me here to love and live in vain--
And wonder what being had come in his way,
That can like ony wabster's shuttle,
Thee and thy suit, though told in moving tropes:
Repentance I should buy sae dear:
And all the gay foppery of summer is flown:
And meditation chastened down, enough;
That, afterwards, a little longer,
Till sweet slumbers stronger creep,
An' hunger'd maukin ta'en her way
Reigns haggard-wild, in sore affright:
But there is ane, a secret ane,
Thou saw the fields laid bare an' waste,
But gie me my love, and a fig for the warl!
The youth approach'd; oft turning his veil'd eye
But three short years will soon wheel roun'--
It tells me too, that on a happy day,
Waved o'er thy sons, victorious to the gale,
To chaps, wha, in a barn or byre,
I'll cross him, and wrack him, until I heart-break him,
Though she bout life but little understood,
Since Goody died, has tumbled down and gone:
To brood so long upon one luxury,
Come--but molest not yon defenceless Urn:
The haughtiest breast its wish might bound
There, high my boiling torrent smokes,
Though young, yet waxing vigorous as the Blast
And soon were lost in circumambient foam:
As vulgar as the dirt he treads upon
And, all subdued, consented to the hour
And I in truth did love him like a brother,
And hunters cruel--pleading with sad care
Through many a clime 'tis mine to go,
Hast thou a goblet for dark sparkling wine?
In vain; remorseless as an infant's bier
_Her_ locks are yellow as gold:
The scene was savage, but the scene was new;
And make them happy in some happy plains.
And wadna manhood been to blame,
In mist or cloud on mast or shroud
And with this other maid to church
As able and as cruel as the Devil!
The lightning of her eye in tears imbued.
The Sabine farm was tilled, the weary Bard's delight.
More welcome were to me grim Winter's wildest roar.
His skill in little stars. The teeming tree
Bad luck on the pennie that tempted my minnie
While, chance, some scattered water-lily sails
Thou wouldst bathe once again. Innocent maid!
And bless your bonnie lasses baith,
And the good south wind still blew behind,
Your pony's worth his weight in gold,
That woefu' morn be ever mourn'd
The courtier's gems may witness love--
And darkness darken into caves,
The while it did unthread the horrid woof
While darkness came as it would strangle light
Thy rural loves are nature's sel';
A lullaby to silence.--"Youth! now strew
And ay she sighs wi' care and pain;
Laugh'd loud and long, and all the while
And pledg'd her their godheads to warrant it good.
And runs for plantin leaves to have it drest.
This said, he rose, faint-smiling like a star
Here holds her search by heaven-taught Reason's beam;
While on the gay dance shone Night's lover-loving Queen?
To roose you up, an' ca' you guid,
And ay a westlin leuk she throws,
We stood together; and that I, so long
Or 'tis the cell of Echo, where she sits,
Of sullen Light, no obscure trembling hues.
Th' incessant roar of headlong tumbling floods--
Joyful are the thoughts of home,
And aye the youngest ever lags behind,
Poor Betty! in this sad distemper,
I have four brutes o' gallant mettle,
More dear, both for themselves, and for thy sake.
Ye catch the glances o' her e'e!
And is, despite of War and wasting fire,
"I cannot tell, I do not know,"
And now the old knight is imprisoned and ta'en
Between their arms; some, clear in youthful bloom,
Chill came the tempest's lower;
Nurture besides, and life, from human fears,
Henceforth I'll rove where busy ploughs
I leave to learnéd fingers, and wise hands,
And now, as deep into the wood as we
For never could I hope to meet with such another.
To him, the Bard that's far awa'.
Some time to any, but those two alone,
And may he wear an auld man's beard,
Beyond a silvery shower, was the arch
Frighted away the Dryads and the Fauns
Enchantment over Passion, and from Woe
Kept off dismay, and terror, and alarm
The mirror where the stars and mountains view
Man and his Maker--but of things allowed,
Sitting upon a rock above the spray,
Gae mind your seam, ye prick-the-louse,
What! shall it e'er be said by British tongue,
Forjesket sair, wi' weary legs,
Some cause unseen still stept between,
His eyes from her sweet face. Most happy they!
Now rosy May comes in wi' flowers,
Or tunes Æolian strains between:
With arms and legs at work and gentle stroke
Before the morn ye'll work mischief;
The colouring of the scenes which fleet along,
But a' your doings to rehearse,
Eternal harmony, and sheds a charm
I saw a fury whetting a death-dart;
But the sweet yellow darlings wi' Geordie imprest,
Peg Nicholson was a good bay mare,
Above the ocean-waves. The stalks, and blades,
Which feeds it as a mother who doth make
A frowning lip, a heart of stone,
Stops with the shore;--upon the watery plain
On all the multitude a nectarous dew.
On thee a tack o' seven times seven
But I met the Devil an' Dundee,
All in its rude and prickly bower,
By wimpling burn and leafy shaw,
"O Death! the poor man's dearest friend--
To get this little basket full."
An' hey for the blessings 'twill bring?
Their full-veined ears, nostrils blood wide, and stop;
Fly from all sorrowing far, far away;
Their capon craws and queer ha ha's,
Mingler with leaves, and dew and tumbling streams,
Wi' thieveless sneer to see his modish mien,
And enter'd marveling: for they knew the street,
A lurking trouble in his nether lip,
I bear a heart shall support me still.
No plough their sinews strained; on grating road
To set her name in measur'd stile;
That poor as Job I should remain unblest:--
Deaf as my friend, he sees them press,
Of rivers, nor hill-flowers running wild
Was, "Johnny! Johnny! mind that you
Wither'd at dew so sweet and virulent;
Lo! where the Giant on the mountain stands,
It's guid to be merry and wise,
My mother's aye jealous of loving,
"E'en here I took the last farewell;
This mountain, whose obliterated plan
Lured by the innocent dimples. To sweet rest
By fitful starts, then musically swells
Thy choral memory of the Bard divine,
To daunton me, and me so young,
With her unmantled neck, and bosom white and bare?
Unseen of all shepherds and flower-loving maids--
And bide by the buff and the blue.
Ere she did venture past a maid
Into how sweet a trance his soul was gone,
Between the tree-stems, marbled plain at first,
The day comes to me, but delight brings me nane;
The freedom of three steeds of dapple brown:
Yet do thou strive; as thou art capable,
Or owre the lays, in splendid blaze,
Are gently prest with far more reverent tread
'Tis very sweet to look into the fair
Hoodwink'd with faery fancy; all amort,
O whare live ye, my bonnie lass,
Their mountain-pipe, so fill the mountaineers
Unheard, unseen, by human ear or eye,
Into my being, and each pleasant scene
The odorous purple of a new-born rose,
Stood smiling; merry Hebe laughs and nods;
Of louder Minstrels in these later days:
What men or gods are these? What maidens loth?
But now his honour maun detach,
I passed the pretty milkmaid with her red and rosy face;
Lament him, Mauchline husbands a',
Emerging, hath awaken'd earth and sky
His flaming robes stream'd out beyond his heels,
Bows before death, tame as a broken sword.
When I was beardless, young and blate,
With sighs, and an alas!--Endymion!
And robb'd him at once of his hope and his life:
And by them lies the dearest lad
And whether there were tears of languishment,
Let such be still thy paramours,
That very instant not one will remain;
Like a coy dog to draw misfortune in.
Fit appellation for this dazzling frame?
An' hae to learning nae pretence,
Such is the most my Memory may desire;
"But why drives on that ship so fast
And thinks a deluge comes to drown the land;
When sic a husband was frae hame,
It feels Elysian, how rich to me,
In ball-rooms and hot theatres, they still
While crashing ice born on the roaring speat,
She ventur'd forward on the light;
O may no wintry season, bare and hoary,
Scarce rear'd above the parent earth
And weekly hunts the almanacks for rain.
Now to my theme--but from thy holy haunt
The sleepy bit lassie, she dreaded nae ill,
But cogitation in his watery shades,
Knowledge enormous makes a God of me.
Here's Kenmure's health in wine, Willie!
Heard'st thou that groan? proceed no further;
Was with its stored thunder labouring up.
Say, maiden, wilt thou go with me
"He lov'd the bird that lov'd the man
It seem'd an emerald in the silver sheen
His spirit flies before him so completely.
Supported him--no pulse, or breath they found,
They talk o' mercy, grace, an' truth,
Was, Titan-like, on daring doubts to pile
Do ye forget the blows, the buffets vile?
To petrify first feelings like the fable into stone,
Their three-mile prayers, and hauf-mile graces,
Nae cauld or hunger e'er can steer them,
Where some bold river breaks the long expanse,
And dash the gumlie jaups up to the pouring skies.
And then I'll stoop from heaven to inspire him.
When thro' his dear strathspeys they bore with highland rage;
As o'er Sicilian seas, clear anthems float
But here an ancient nation fam'd afar,
I love the south-west wind, or low or loud,
My spear aloft, as signal for the chace--
So I sat down and joined in the chorus of song.
And soon the whisper went about the town,
The mine's dire earthquake, and the pallid host
Unmoved the Moslem sits, the light Greek carols by.
Eclips'd her crescents, and lick'd up her stars:
The scented birk and hawthorn white,
As flames among a hundred woods;
Ye grouse that crap the heather bud;
Tho' thou's howe-backit, now, an' knaggie,
Then at the balance let's be mute,
We feel the safety of a hawthorn glade:
Each corse lay flat, lifeless and flat;
Fond lovers' parting is sweet painful pleasure,
The tide of Empires' fluctuating course;
And, for the little songster's nest,
Lest their own judgments should become too bright,
What careth she for hearts when once possessed?
With pleasure drugged, he almost longed for woe,
Thy mither's person, grace, an' merit,
Why she sat drooping by the Basil green,
Go out and track the badger to his den,
Shall sweetly pay the tender care
But the soft numbers, in that moment spoken,
A little distance from the prow
Ay waukin O, waukin ay and wearie,
Naething could resist my Nancy;
Then glut thy sorrow on a morning rose,
Broke by the share of every rustic plough:
Match me those Houries, whom ye scarce allow
Tis by the skylark's little wing
To her entrancements: hither sleep awhile!
And from their treasures scatter pearled hail;
All close they met again, before the dusk
Spreading a shade: the Naiad 'mid her reeds
Or may be nothing; still they wear
Why do I know ye? why have I seen ye? why
With flow'rs so white and leaves so green,
Peace, enjoyment, love, and pleasure!
Then farewell, Horace--whom I hated so,
To bend with apples the moss'd cottage-trees,
While new-ca'd ky, rowte at the stake,
Chilly grief my life-blood freezes,
With the conquering sun of spring, and left the skies
Telling us how fair, trembling Syrinx fled
His awful chair of state resolves to mount,
Scramble and hurry where they fall.
To see scull, coffin'd bones, and funeral stole;
Of vice-entailed Corruption; they no land
Shall heroes and patriots ever produce:
Some say she drowned it in the pond,
Whene'er I wander, at the fall of night,
Feels all the bitter horrors of his crime,
And bonnie blue are the sunny skies;
And lang's the night frae e'en to morn--
The younkers a' are warned to obey;
To wear it ever on thy lip and brow,
Pink robes, and wavy hair, and diamond jar,
Thy scalding in the seas? What, have I rous'd
Monastic dome! condemned to uses vile!
I'll swim to the syrens, and one moment listen
Or pity's notes in luxury of tears,
From the dark barriers of that rugged clime,
While ever and anon to his shorn peers
"Most musical, most melancholy"[1] Bird!
Come, poor birds, from foes severe
When there cam a yell o' foreign squeels,
My heart to my mou' gied a sten;
Lived chiefly at the Convent or the Castle.
We will drain our dearest veins,
Ah! Greece! they love thee least who owe thee most--
In passing here, his owlet pinions shook;
If thou hast met this fair one;
Among cool clouds and winds, but that the free,
Whene'er she thought of Stephen Hill.
Beneath that tree, while yet it was a tree
Vainly his incense soars, his victim bleeds;
In elegant, pure, and aerial minds.
Here's freedom to him that wad read,
Twined with my heart, and can I deem thee dead
May come at to destroy. Had they the wing
To nought else constant, hither deigned to flee,
Thus loitering pensive on the willing seas,
And shelter, shade, nor home have I,
They closed like painter's brush when even was.
The dull of midnight, at her couch's foot
He hirples twa fauld as he dow,
An' ane, a chap that's damn'd auldfarren,
For those dark curls and those bright eyes
Until thou liftedst up thine eyelids fine:
Swift, mad, fantastic round the rocks, and lash'd
A little lamb, and then its mother!
To that trusty auld worthy Clackleith,
The boat rocks at the pier o' Leith;
Is not the love of these deep in my heart
Which he has never used; that thought with him
And Greece her very altars eyes in vain:
One keeps the heart-bred villain full in sight,
I'll teach him how the owlet sings.
Vieing with fish of brilliant dye below;
That, whether there be shine, or gloom o'ercast,
Loud, deep, and lang the thunder bellow'd:
The wedding-guest here beat his breast,
I threw my shell away upon the sand,
Smiles form the channel of a future tear,
His fingers went across it--All were mute
And Sun-set into rose-hues sees them wrought
Opening his eyelids with a healthier brain,
Where a blue sky, and glowing clime, extends,
And train'd to arms in stern misfortune's field--
The Scipios' tomb contains no ashes now;
As is the wand that queen Titania wields.
I am the self-consumer of my woes,
What a night! The wind howls, hisses, and but stops
And show to common eyes these secret bowers?
At this, my boy, so fair and slim,
Came many a tiptoe, amorous cavalier,
And bound him in a dungeon fast;
Down pleasure's stream, wi' swelling sails,
All tendrils green, of every bloom and hue,
But wields not, as of old, her thirsty lance,
Idol--Saint--Virgin--Prophet--Crescent--Cross--
And made their dove-wings tremble. On he flared,
My clenched hands;--for lo! the poppies hung
She gambols with the men and laughs aloud
Which others rave of, though they know it not?
By one, and one, the bolts full easy slide:--
What are our woes and sufferance? Come and see
Wi', deil hae her! and, deil hae him!
And Calvin's fock are fit to fell him;
He must repair, to ply the artist's trade.
For if you do but taste his blood,
How guiltless blood for guilty man was shed;
Through autumn mists, and took Peona's hand:
Of harmony, and the deep power of joy,
Nor from the base pursuit had turned aside,
As the old hedger to his toil returns,
For ye ay shall mak the bed to me."
But if the beast and branks be spar'd
Of noon, whose sun may bring them golden wine.
Use other speech than looks; bidding him raise
He wauken'd the auld wife frae her sleep,
At my lost brightness, my impassion'd wiles,
That paled sky in the Autumn seemed to burn,
Some swagger hame, the best they dow,
Arrayed in many a dun and purple streak,
Late on that eve, as 'twas the night before
Yet Time, who changes all, had altered him
As free from danger as the heavens are free
He threw himself, and just into the air
Who first were on the earth; and sculptures rude
Nae cares to gie us joy or grievin';
True it is, she had one failing--
Love and thy vain employs, away
Would sit out the week or the month or the year
Like school-boys, at th' expected warning,
For proud each peasant as the noblest duke:
'Tis when a youthful, loving, modest pair,
They mind't na wha the chorus teuk,
Oh, rare! to see our elbucks wheep,
A whiskin' beard about her mou',
Melted and disappear'd as suddenly;
And giving out a shout most heaven rending,
An endless fountain of immortal drink,
What wreath for Lamia? What for Lycius?
Be jealous that the foot of other wight
Tully reposed from Rome;--and where yon bar
A man of fashion, too, he made his tour,
To make the youngster for his crime atone;
No haughty pomp in marching chime,
But let the kirk-folk ring their bells,
To which the steps are mountains; where the God
Great is thy pow'r, an' great thy fame;
Waving on high the desolating brand,
Went off in gentle windings to the hoar
A listener to itself, was strangely framed;
I dread thee, fate, relentless and severe,
Come, join your counsel and your skills
Leave them, O Muse! for thou anon wilt find
The young, the innocent, who fondly lov'd us,
The silence of sorrow it seems to supply,
Across the rolling, dashing roar,
A woman's shape, and charming as before.
She saw it waxing very pale and dead,
I've sought thy father far and wide.
As the ground was before, thus let it be;--
In gulf or aerie, mountains or deep dells,
The while let music wander round my ears.
O stay, sweet warbling woodlark, stay!
The cuckoo that one listens far away
He fell, and falling nations mourned around;
I see the wild flowers, in their summer morn
They run to seek the shallow pit, and wade
Young kings upon their hansel throne
English colours were a-flying where the British squadron lay.
Sits o'er his newly-gather'd fruits,
And in his pocket bring it home.
And grew a giant tree;--the Mind may grow the same.
The roar of waters!--from the headlong height
O 'twas a cruel thing."--"Now thou dost taunt
This is to be alone--This, This is Solitude!
But Betty is not quite at ease;
A poor friendless wand'rer may well claim a sigh,
Where is another chaos? Where?"--That word
Oh, Christ! it is a goodly sight to see
Thy quiet soul on all bestowing,
And kneel, "Ye Pow'rs," and warm implore,
But a' the pleasures e'er I saw,
My goblet full of wine--my topmost deed:--
He rails at our mountebank squad,
The Ocean Queen, the free Britannia, bears
At length they ventured forth, though doubting sore
The glooms they approached, and the dews like a rain
Holding a poor, decrepid standard out
All words of reverence still his heart reveres,
The brightest o' beauty may cloy when possest;
The flower it blaws, it fades and fa's,
The prattling things are just their pride,
And made them a' in sarks to me:
Canst thou leave me thus, my Katy?
Provoking envious gibe from each pedestrian churl.
Before his goddess, in a blissful swoon.
Here poor integrity can sit at ease,
The Bale-fires flash on high:--from rock to rock!
Where soft the climbers fearless tread,
There's the yellowhammer's nest, bonny Mary O!
The first link in the mighty plan
Where kingcups grow most beauteous to behold
Come, kittle up your moorland-harp
"Lamia!" he cried--and no soft-toned reply.
You then might sow to reap in vain.
By Daphne's fright, behold Apollo!--"
In naked feeling, and in aching pride,
A black-eyed swan upon the widening stream;
And bid the day begin, if but for change.
Oer the disordered scenes of woods and fields,
And then she whisper'd in such trembling tone,
And seven braw fellows, stout an' able
This page, which from my reveries I feed,
O Music, Music, breathe despondingly!
And while the dog lay panting in the sedge
Canst thou leave me thus, my Katy?
Paw up against the light, and do strange deeds
And think of yellow leaves, of owlets cry,
Afraid of praise she hurries down the streets
For a Lalland face he feared none,
Hour after hour, to each lush-leav'd rill.
True dignity abides with him alone
The spreading thorn the linnet.
Then marks th' unyielding mass with grave designs,
And beats the many dogs in noises loud.
Tho' I should pawn my pleugh and graith,
Hails Dapple's trot an hour before it's dark.
In loud lament bewail'd his lord,
Consents to death, but conquers agony,
Were creatures God Almighty made,
A sight too fearful for the feel of fear:
With starless gloom o'ercast my sullen sky;
'Twad be my dead, that will be seen,
Their hearts no selfish stern absorbent stuff,
O heart-felt raptures!--bliss beyond compare!
And with poor skill let pass into the breeze
Four laurell'd spirits, heaven-ward to intreat him.
With forms which live and suffer--let that pass--
Doth ease its heart of love in.--I am gone
Potato-bings are snugged up frae skaith
And as sure as I live to drive nails in a shoe
The sweetest far of Scotia's holy lays:
In motley robe to dance at masking ball,
Are empty left? Who, who away would be
Her beauty farther than the falcon spies;
Ambracia's gulf behold, where once was lost
May every son be worthy of his sire;
To hold thee as the game of fools,
I thought the flowers upon the hills
"Up, Willie, waur them a', man!"
Your speed will outrival the dart:
Him any mercy, in that mansion foul,
Since to a woe like this I have been led
Poor thoughtless devils! yet may shine
Some months went by, ere I the tales believed;
At whose destruction-breathing word,
Poor man, the flie, aft bizzes bye,
And dear was she I dare na name,
That gave us th' Electoral stem?
They cried, La belle dame sans merci,
Here is the glen, and here the bower,
She says she lo'es me best of a'.
Rests with the lamb and rises with the lark,
We gaze and turn away, and know not where,
"Gude day to you, brute!" he comes ben:
Full on this casement shone the wintry moon,
and neer so much as dances with the men
Ten children, Sir! had I to feed,
An' whyles, but ay owre late, I think
Yet leaves him happy as a child at play.
Search, Thea, search! and tell me, if thou seest
Then feats like Squire Billy's you ne'er can achieve 'em;
Such home-bred glory, that they cry'd in vain,
Or upward ragged precipices flit
Their fond imaginations,--saving him
But kill a new-born infant thus!
Thus sprang direct towards the Galaxy.
Turn again, thou lovely maiden.
Wi' sma' persuasion she agreed,
To taste the gentle moon, and freshening beads,
For lack o' thee, I leave this much-lov'd shore,
The pipy hemlock to strange overgrowth;
On stilly wings and forked tail,
And listened to the wind that now did stir
There's hornpipes and strathspeys, man;
To get auld Scotland back her kettle:
Such be our fate when we return to land!
Proud of their trampled nature, and so die,
The rustling corn, the fruited thorn,
Paining me through: those sounds grow strange to me,
Whyles round a rocky scaur it strays,
Made, by a spell, the triple league decrease
And thou shalt quaff it:--thou shalt hear
Still thou art blest, compar'd wi' me!
And gore-faced Treason sprung from her adulterate joy.
Far away from heart and eye and forever far away.
More serene than Cordelia's countenance?
Now 'tis a fairer season; ye have breathed
Picture o' the great Clanronald;
And when the army in the Indias lay
Must earth no rascal save thyself endure?
Nae leaf o' mine shall greet the spring,
And into mellow whispering calms would drop
The friendless bard and rustic song
Though it should serve nae ither end
Without my love, not a' the charms
'Till the mortal stroke shall lay me low,
There Harold gazes on a work divine,
Such as the great of yore, Canova  is to-day.
An' each took aff his several way,
And a' that she has made o' that,
Yet haply wanting wherewithal to live;
Gazing upon the ground, with thoughts which dare not glow?
Clasp'd like a missal where swart Paynims pray;
The hill and wags his tail to meet the yoe,
And pebbles blue from deep enchanted wells.
What flock wi' Moodie's flock could rank,
And once, as by the north side of the Chapel
Poor worthless elf, eats a dinner,
Blew where it listed, laying all things prone,--
But if, as now it seems, your vision rests
Their stony eye-balls glitter'd on
Nor asks if they bring aught to hope or fear.
Stopt by the storm, that long in sullen black
Health lived and issued from his voice.
O rough, rude, ready-witted Rankine,
Which _was_ the mightiest in its old command,
That peaceful still 'twixt bitterest foemen flow;
And through the light the horsemen swiftly glide,
For pity do not this sad heart belie--
Slowly she rose, as though she would have fled,
And tears 'mong the dewdrops of morning oft glistened.
Yelling their uncouth dirge, long daunced the kirtled clan.
An' plunder'd o' her hindmost groat
In the wild pomp of mountain-majesty!
He sought through park and plain;
She took to her hills, and her arrows let fly--
When to the bridal he should lead his paramour.
A Seraph chosen from the bright abyss
That dyed thy mountain streams with Gothic gore?
How merrily they creep, and run, and fly!
He lent them his name to the firm.
Let me one moment to her breathing list;
Birds' nests and eggs caused no surprise,
But feel the shock renewed, nor can efface
Upon the forehead of the age to come;
The red peat gleams, a fiery kernel,
An' unco tyke lap o'er the dyke,
Unknown, Lethean, sigh to us--O sigh!
To meat or sleep, or light o' day?
From marking wildly-scatter'd flow'rs,
Or 'mid the venal senate's roar,
Of one to stone converted by amaze,
And now I see them on a green-hill's side
My rambles led me to a gipsy's camp,
To shun the bitter blaudin' show'r,
Thus memory every where her tidings brings
But sorrow tak him that's sae mean,
O magic sleep! O comfortable bird,
But ere the bud was on the tree,
My heart yearns at fate like yours,
'Twas vast, and desolate, and icy-cold;
To the void air, bidding them find out love:
A homeward fever parches up my tongue--
But love never heeded to treasure up the may,
Childe Harold wends through many a pleasant place.
A gentler speech from burning Porphyro;
He knew whose gentle hand was at the latch,
Thoughtless, as if on shore they still were free to rove.
Too much of pity after they are dead,
To wipe those briny tears away.
From mighty wrongs to petty perfidy
Have I put forth to serve thee. What, not yet
Nor rise thy sons, but idly rail in vain,
A path in hell, for ever would I bless
Bring me a tablet whiter than a star,
But surely France must be a pleasant place
But Bacchus, he laughed from the old tavern sign,
Shall win the young bride with her long flowing hair,
Day and night, and night and day,
Which is not of the pangs that pass away;
But bid me with my wreath one matchless Lily blend.
And build on nothing but a passing cloud!
The lord of lowing herds; but not before
"Waes me for Johnny Ged's-Hole  now,"
Tells where the volumed Cataract doth roll
Were not for me, brought up in nothing ill;
In the gay rosy morn, as it bathes in the dew;
O Life! how pleasant in thy morning,
And hies for shelter from his naked toil;
A ray direct from pitying heav'n,
Ah! surely he had burst our mortal bars;
Ye see yon birkie, ca'd--a lord,
The tapetless ramfeezl'd hizzie,
My heart goes far away to dream.
Is wan on Neptune's blue: yet there's a stress
By their right arms the conquest must be wrought?
Nor unbeseem the promise of thy Spring--
An' hillocks, stanes, and bushes, kenn'd ay
Supportress of the faery-roof, made moan
Why should I ope thy melancholy eyes?
Here mingled in their many-hued array,
Rudders that for a hundred years had lost
And stars by thousands! Point me out the way
Where to the whistling blast and waters' roar
Of something more, more than her empery
And all ye gentle girls who foster up
Is persecuted more, and fever'd more,
Since I tint my bairns, and he tint his crown;
Warbling the while as if to lull and greet
Or that boys would change their minds and forsake such summer joys;
Tho' I to foreign lands must hie,
Amang them I spied my faithless fause lover,
Him whom she loves, her idiot boy.
Tell me thou bring'st me my Willie the same.
When shall she breathe her from the blushing toil?
Still as the silence round about his lair;
Laid lower than the meanest flower,
The gentle pride, the lordly state,
What thou among the leaves hast never known,
Where'er we tread 'tis haunted, holy ground;
Old Loda,  still rueing the arm of Fingal,
'Twas ae night lately, in my fun,
His golden throne, bent warm on amorous theft:
I wha deserve sic just damnation,
O happy spirit-home! O wondrous soul!
Of love, that fairest joys give most unrest;
From mouth to mouth through all the country pass'd:
Witches on sheep-trays gallop by,
Turbid torrents, wintry swelling,
For she's the pink o' womankind,
Now life's chilly evening dim shades on your eye,
But little wist she Maggie's mettle--
More rich than other climes' fertility;
It's no the frosty winter wind,
O' speechless grief and dark despair:
On what were chambers--arch crushed, column strown
But or ever a prayer had gusht,
Making me quickly veil my eyes and face:
Has viewed at times, I ween, a full fair sight,
Taint thee with untimely blights!
When soon or late they reach that coast,
Mother of Arts! as once of Arms! thy hand
'Mong lilies, like the youngest of the brood.
Ye Jacobites by name, give and ear, give an ear;
Syne up the back-stile and let naebody see,
As new things meet thy childish eyes
The miry beasts retreating frae the pleugh:
Say, wilt thou go with me, sweet maid,
Die into life: so young Apollo anguish'd:
The Grasshopper's among some grassy hills.
But Nith maun be my Muse's well;
Nature's observatory--whence the dell,
Grew drunken, and would have its head and bent.
Ance mair I hail thee, thou gloomy December!
And vexed with mirth the drowsy ear of Night.
I'll laugh, an' sing, an' shake my leg,
From Jenny's bosom met a heavy sigh;
Pavilions him in bloom, and he doth see
And she her half-discover'd revels keeping.
Roaring as rivers breaking loose in floods
O had I ne'er seen thee, my Eppie M'Nab!
﻿    It is an ancyent Marinere,
This was thy billie, dam and sire--
Press'd, saying: "Sister, I would have command,
A little breeze to creep between the fans
The Spanish empire's tint a-head,
In distant countries I have been,
The golden lyre itself were dimly seen:
An' syne they think to climb Parnassus
"It's neither your stot nor your staig I shall crave,
Sighs, too, as mournful as that Memnon's harp
Een at St. Thomas tide old Rover's bark
Joyous, and many as the leaves in spring,
And scarce permitted, guarded, veiled, to move,
To hear her whisper woman's lore so well;
The vera thought o't need na fear them.
And the rivers we're eying burn to gold as they run;
And Friendship it hath burned away,
Four gallant brutes as e'er did draw;
Until there shone a fabric crystalline,
Ilk glen and shaw she knew, man:
Our neighbours' sympathy may ease us,
Who, soon as mounted, with his switching weals,
May be some ither thing they gie me
Unlike sage proverb'd wisdom's hard-wrung boon.
There, at Vienna or Versailles,
He tries the nerve of Phœbus' golden bow,
My life and all seemed turned to clay.
Five years have passed; five summers, with the length
I saw thee, and my blood no longer cold
To the astounded kingdoms all inert,
And love will break the soundest rest.
And there are times when travel goes
His head he raised--there was in sight,
Sleep'st thou, or wak'st thou, fairest creature?
Breathing upon the flowers his passion new,
The young ones join in love's delightful themes,
For pleasures past I do not grieve,
(And ne'er misfortune's eastern blast
I sat a weeping: what enamour'd bride,
These lines; and howsoever they be done,
With his delights; for when tired out with fun
Stems the upbursting cold: a wild rose tree
My thoughts are a' bound up in ane,
And what's more wonderful, when big loads foil
Can firmly force his jarring thoughts to peace?
This day the Kirk kicks up a stoure,
Its delicate amber; and the dairy pails
To see the gipsies, so beloved before,
Or gently prest, returned the pressure still:
When at his heart he felt the dagger,
The ocean with its vastness, its blue green,
Of sisterly affection. Can I want
And vainly waits the morsel thrown away.
The ev'ning gilds the ocean's swell;
No woods were green enough, no bower divine,
Strange scenes mere shadows are to me,
Of rage, of fear, anxiety, revenge,
And, hating no one, love but only her!
While sans culottes stoop up the mountain high,
A vow, they seal'd it with a kiss,
But dreaded as a haunted spot.--
Whispering in midnight silence, said the youth,
That which I have been--and my visions flit
Mother can't bear to turn him out of doors
Had as much power as he to put John on his feet.
Who shrugs and nettles deep his pomp and pride.
Men, women, rich and poor, in the cool hours,
Come, blue-eyed Maid of Heaven!--but Thou, alas!
Nor all that heralds rake from coffined clay,
To watch and mock thee shrinking, thou hast smiled
And ev'ry new cork is a new spring of joy;
And as he to the court-yard pass'd along,
So, by some hedge, the gen'rous steed deceas'd,
Chilly shrink in sleety show'r!
Shone like the bubbling foam about a keel
And somewhat of a sad perplexity,
His braw calf-ward whare gowans grew,
Ah! I will taste that dew, for me 'tis meet,
The field of Freedom--Faction--Fame--and Blood:
Here Folly dashed to earth the victor's plume,
As "Wantley Dragon," and the "Magic Rose,"
With those bold voyagers, who made discovery
And looks--if looks could speak-proclaim her won.
Can all Saint, Sage, or Sophist ever writ,
And up I rose refresh'd, and glad, and gay,
Both for her messenger and nurse;
Never may'st thou, lovely flow'r,
That danc'd to the lark's early song?
Doff all sad fears, thou white deliciousness,
They ne'er wi' my Phillis can vie:
For when no more he spreads his feathers free,
He waddled in the water-pudge, and waggle went his tail,
Where squats the hare, to terrors wide awake,
Rivin' the words to gar them clink;
And _is_ the loveliest, and must ever be
The Bard of Prose, creative Spirit! he
And Betty will not then depart.
A pigmy scraper, wi' his fiddle,
To them I may have owed another gift,
And in the heaven's eternal blue.
Thank the great gods, and look not bitterly;
See thy God face to face, as thou dost now
And grasshoppers in merry moods still wear
The final gulphing; the poor struggling souls:
Beyond thee, dearie, beyond thee, dearie,
Meet some of our near-dwellers with my car."
Which Petrarch's laureate brow supremely wore,
To cluster round it when we next shall meet.
Will never give him pinions, who intreats
Now masked in silence or withheld by Pride,
"For far-off fowls hae feathers fair,
It melted from his grasp: her hand he kiss'd,
I could replace them if I would; still teems
O'erwhelming water-courses; scaring out
Stranger, go! Heaven be thy guide!
The coins o' Satan's coronation!
One's thoughts from such a beauty; when I hear
I'll kilt my coats aboon my knee,
A thousand sharp punctures of cold-sweating pain,
No soul of greatness springing up within?
"I know your bent--these are no laughing times:
Who think to storm the world by dint of merit,
Since cause might be which Skill could never find;
By Thrasimene's lake,  in the defiles
And speak a blessing: Mark me! Thou hast thews
Like one, that on a lonely road
While the dogs at the noise begin barking,
And any man who pass'd her door,
And now, said the blacksmith, let forfeits come first
Fish-semblances, of green and azure hue,
When riseth Lacedemon's Hardihood,
And the world before me to win my bread,
Burning hot is the ground, liquid gold is the air;
Clock-a-clay keeps warm and dry.
And tranquil sternness, which had ta'en the place
"Would plant thee where yet thou might'st blossom again."
The Queen and the rest of the gentry,
Ilk man and mother's son, take heed:
And at the least 'twill startle off her cares."
Sic twa--O! do I live to see't,
Then we call in our pamper'd mountebanks--
And he made a wry face, for his pocket was bare.
As such like go unwedded to the grave,--
And, as the lava ravishes the mead,
And now, whatever might betide,
Shalt thou not last? Time's scythe and Tyrants' rods
Sair do I fear that despair maun abide me!
The deep-recessed vision:--all was blight;
"Where are your books? that light bequeath'd
And then in quiet circles did they press
Death's gien the lodge an unco devel,
And many a chapel bell the hour is telling,
Beneath the waves like Afric's ebony,
Nature's gifts to all are free:
Upon his cheek, while thus he lifeful spake.
To cruel injuries he became a prey,
All perished--all, in one remorseless year,
"Oh cruel! I'm almost three-score;
Our king and our country to save--
In hobbling speed he roams the pasture round,
Hill tops like hot iron glitter bright in the sun,
And roar every note o' the damn'd,
Where lone Utraikey forms its circling cove,
Ready to melt between an infant's gums:
Fond lovers, yet not quite hob nob,
The chill air comes around me oceanly,
He'd venture the gallows for siller,
An' gouts torment him inch by inch,
Of Venice think of thine, despite thy watery wall.
Baptiz'd him _eu_, and kick'd him from his sight.
Until it ceas'd; and still he kept them wide:
Wherewith the seasonable month endows
And when a tale is beautifully staid,
Fate waits to sack Ambition's shrine
That he might at the threshold one hour wait
Him whom she loves, her idiot boy,
Tho' wit and worth in either sex,
How dare you set your fit upon her,
Or thou wilt force me from this secrecy,
Of noble natures, of the gloomy days,
An' nighted trav'llers are allur'd
With our pockets full of peas we had stolen from the grain;
Where all lies foundered that was ever dear:
But, Thou art good; and goodness still
Such scorn of man had helped to brave the shock;
Feel all about their undulating home.
Be but a vain belief, yet, oh! how oft,
Now I begin to feel thine orby power
My sickening memory; and, though Time hath taught
The third of Libra's equal sway,
Though winning near the goal--yet, do not grieve;
Could blunt the sabre's edge, or clear the cannon's smoke.
But stringin' blethers up in rhyme,
No more I trace the light footsteps of pleasure,
I tried to call them back, but unbidden they are gone
I shelter in thy honour'd shade.
I bless and praise thy matchless might,
Some shape of beauty moves away the pall
Then I might see the joyfu' sight,
O for three words of honey, that I might
Peg Nicholson was a good bay mare,
While arts of minstrelsy among them rung,
The priest and hedgehog in their robes are snug;
For thee to tumble into Naiads' cells,
Wi' sweet-milk cheese, in monie a whang,
I sat beside the pasture stream,
While from beneath the threat'ning portcullis
He fights with dogs for bones and beats them all.
Deeper than by a feeling clothed in word,
Olympus! we are safe! Now, Carian, break
The old dog barked and followed the pursuit.
We'll find thy father in the wood.
God grant the king, and ilka man,
And deemed his spirit now so firmly fixed
An' gif the custoc's sweet or sour,
And Santa Croce wants their mighty dust;
"Now ye are flames, I'll tell you how to burn,
And I must blush in heaven. O that I
Forthwith this frame of mine was wrench'd
The deil would ne'er abide her.
I wander my lane like a night-troubled ghaist,
Up a great river, great as any sea,
I hotly burn--to be a Calidore--
To gie them music was his charge;
Leading to universal knowledge--see,
When he was young he little knew
Hard by the Castle, and at latest eve,
Still wilt thou dream on future Joy and Woe?
In solitude.--Stranger! these gloomy boughs
The craz'd creations of misguided whim;
In some delicious ramble, he had found
O burning hell! in all thy store of torments,
I think the wicked men deserve the sin;
And often stoops to see the busy crow,
Ere ceased the inhuman shout which hailed the wretch who won.
"And there upon the ground I sit--
Who deemed thee for a time whate'er thou didst assert.
Sit down at rest, and walk at ease,
Sitting beneath the midmost forest tree,
Gude faith, she'll soon o'er-gang ye.
Slow climbs the stile, or opes the creaky gate,
A whisp'ring throb did witness bear
How lightning-swift the change! a youthful wight
"For she guides him smooth or grim.
Swoon'd, murmuring of love, and pale with pain.
Yet still his jaws and teeth they clatter,
Than thus to love and live with thee, thou beautiful delight!
Among the shepherds, 'twas believed ever,
Their barbarous, yet their not indecent, glee;
And thus he lives too happy to be poor
Of this fair river; thou, my dearest Friend,
So weak a creature could turn off the help
In plain braid Scots hold forth a plain braid story!
In torched mines and noisy factories,
And in her harmony of varied greens,
From their fresh beds, and scattered thoughtlessly
That many a mood of joy instils?
The heart's bleed longest, and but heal to wear
He tore it into pieces small as snow
For from his cottage door in peace or strife
The toilsome way, and long, long league to trace,
O had I ne'er seen thee, my Eppie M'Nab!
As thou wert served, so would they overwhelm
And of three sweetest pleasurings the choice:
Into a forest quiet for the slaughter.
A faltering, ardent kiss he stole;
Forgot that he had woods to pass:
Dread opener of the mysterious doors
creep, fly, or do as they like; and seldom or ever do wrong. In fact
A gray and grief-worn aspect of old days;
In trammels of perverse deliciousness.
The cat runs races with her tail. The dog
Shrieks, yells, and groans of torture-pilgrimage;
In love and freedom they rejoice,
This Hal for genius, wit, and lore,
Or bringing faggots from the wood.
Up little poles in wreaths of scarlet flowers.
That winding stream I love so dear!
A rousing whid, at times, to vend,
He waits all day beside his little flock
But to throw back at times her veiling hair.
I will fight France with you, Dumourier;
What doth strengthen and what maim.
Nor niggard of his cheer;  the passer by
Shapes of delight, of mystery, and fear,
May desolation's lang teeth'd harrow,
That in her womb the infant wrought
With a most voiceless thought, sheathing it as a sword.
Tho' waired on Willie Chalmers.
That wantons thro' the flowering thorn:
That grows upon the castle wa';
Hide in deep herbage; and ere yet the bees
The clear religion of heaven! Fold
The den expands, and Expectation mute
And withers the faster, the faster it grows;
Pity the best of words should be but wind!
And winna say o'er far for thrice,
An emblem of his own unfruitful life:
Safe from all eyes as in the loneliest ground;
Chained to the chariot of triumphal Art,
Savage and shrill! But with the breath which fills
And knew not quiet was the best.
To what dark cave of frozen night
Who, save thy mind's reproach, nought earthly fear'st,
But, waes my heart! he could na mend it!
So now the muse has run me hard and long--
Horrid sprites shall haunt you.
Amang the reeds the ducklings cry,
And onward viewed the mount, not yet forgot,
The gibbet in its terror stood:
To the swoon'd serpent, and with languid arm,
The lazy mist hangs from the brow of the hill,
Sweet Spirit, thou hast school'd my infancy:
In fragrance soft, and coolness to the eye,
Be deaf to them, and then, as twere, ye'll see
We felt thy kind protection like a friend
Erskine, a spunkie Norland billie;
Things such as these are ever harbingers
Is folded by the Muses; the bright roll
Of conscience, for their long offended might,
When pou'd and worn a common toy!
Coeus, and Gyges, and Briareüs,
Of the garden-terrace, towards him they bent
The wretch beneath the dreary pole
Endymion could not speak, but gazed on her;
All, all forgotten--and shall Man repine
In its ripe warmth this gracious morning time."
I'll not believe thee, till I know
The brethren o' the mystic level
All dark and absent as a corpse's eye.
Altho' thro' foreign climes I range,
Surrounded thus by bolus, pill,
Will silent be; and not a soul to tell
Who feel their arms, and breasts, and kiss and stare,
That at the Lord's house, ev'n on Sunday,
And late at night she sought her love--
Cries Betty, "he'll be back again;
That cost her mony a blirt and bleary.
While I held my little plough though twas but a willow twig,
Around giddy Endymion; seeing he
The hedge briar rose hung right across the path,
Except good sense and social glee,
Lo! Cintra's glorious Eden intervenes
And green lane traverse heedless where it goes
She fell, but fell with spirit truly Roman,
Benevolence, with mild, benignant air,
Have I not suffered things to be forgiven?
Though a descended Pleiad, will not one
All I beheld and felt. Methought I lay
My name from out the temple where the dead
On with the dance! let joy be unconfined;
And there in strife no burning thoughts to heed,
Wauken, ye breezes, row gently, ye billows,
On Fasten-een we had a rockin',
And keep that fiend Despondence far aloof.
But luckless fortune's northern storms
She hears call out her frowning spouse;
But, to conclude my lang epistle,
In such society, yet still more dear:
Circled a million times within the space
Be they high or lowly bred  They die.
Bit through by the horse now at feed on the moor;
The Promontory whence the Traitor's Leap
Where tawny white and red flush clover buds
No friend the parting hand extended gave,
Where hunters fand the murder'd bairn;
The sweetest still to wife or maid,
How oft I've bent me oer her fire and smoke,
And the thyme it is wither'd, and rue is in prime.
"There surely must some reason be
And sae about him there I spier't,
Ages and Realms are crowded in this span,
Doom'd to that sorest task of man alive--
Who had with flaming tongue and pen
Fell thin as a young mother's, who doth seek
And all those acts which Deity supreme
The pearls, that on each glist'ning circlet sleep,
One, who, of late, had ta'en sweet forest walks
Yet, as my hand was warm, I thought I'd better
A golden butterfly; upon whose wings
Of Druid stones, upon a forlorn moor,
Yet sure those ills that wring my soul
Neighbours where they neighbours meet
What care, though striding Alexander past
And your skulls are a storehouse of lead,
May pierce them on the sudden with the thorn
Than vulgar minds may be with all they seek possest.
She seem'd, at once, some penanced lady elf,
Lies safely, with the leveret, in the corn.
A youth, by heavenly power lov'd and led,
Here and no further learning's channels ran;
To meet their Dad, wi' flichterin' noise an' glee.
But now a Bride and Mother--and now _there!_
Among the Gods, upon Olympus old,
Yet look upon it, and 'twould size and swell
The vine of glossy sprout; the ivy mesh,
His country's pride! his country's stay--
Up from their hurry see the Skylark flies,
Thou canst not surely be the same that thou didst seem."
Came shaking hands wi' wabster lowns,
Striped like a zebra, freckled like a pard,
And, to support his helpless woodbine state,
Of glory streams along the Alpine height
I love to rustle through the sedge
Therefore no insult will I give his spirit,
Into thy statue's form, and look like gods below.
Let such approach this consecrated Land,
Listening to the doubling roar,
Light flew his earnest words, among the blossoms blown.
O Thou, great Governor of all below!
'Twas love; cold,--dead indeed, but not dethroned.
Due adoration, thus began to adore;
See! the smoking bowl before us,
Its bottom will I strew with amber shells,
And there, at night, in frost and snow,
And the flags where the butter-bump hides in for ever;
With ebon-tipped flutes: close after these,
Anger our huntsman: Breather round our farms,
Made great Apollo blush for this his land.
He follow'd, and she turn'd to lead the way
Things pass like shadows, and the sky
I saw grow up from the horizon's brink
I'd shelter thee, I'd shelter thee:
Long absent HAROLD re-appears at last;
Lorenzo, a young palmer in Love's eye!
And could not pray:--nor can I now--so on
Show'd him the gentleman and scholar;
Though scarce as lang's a gude kale-whittle,
Beyond the sea, beyond the sun,
And cast dirt on his godship's face;
Hung down his head, nor made reply;
I shelter in thy honour'd shade.
And put it in her bosom, where it dries
An honest man by honest parents bred,
I'll gie you my bonnie black hen,
In "pride of place" here last the Eagle flew,
Full golden; in her eyes a brighter day
Wilt thou devote this body to the earth:
Here in sound silence sheath their rage in death.
And he had learned to love,--I know not why,
Look'd high defiance. Lo! his heart 'gan warm
Glimmers thy crescent? Wheresoe'er it be,
And in the dimpling water-pudge you waddle in and out;
Here Ehrenbreitstein,  with her shattered wall
Nae bombast spates o' nonsense swell;
Hear it not, Wallace, in thy bed of death!
Tis thus they live--a picture to the place,
A thousand Powers keep religious state,
But what, without the social thought of thee,
Thou art a dainty chiel, O Grose!--
I love to walk the fields, they are to me
To gladden thee; and all I dare to say,
And thousand other signs of purer life;
Thine air is the young breath of passionate Thought;
So through the moonlight lanes they go,
And thus spake on that ancyent Man,
The bloom of a fine summer's day!
The wretched have no more to fear!
Of velvet leaves and bugle-blooms divine;
A chield wha'll soundly buff our beef;
'Twas Apollonius: something too he laugh'd,
Then raptur'd sip, and sip it up.
In wretched interchange of wrong for wrong
Come to my bowl, come to my arms,
When the fresh breeze is fair as breeze may be,
To die, when summer dies on the cold sward.
Ill fedd she was, and thinly clad;
The swine run round and grunt and play with straw,
She hanged her baby on the tree,
Goddess! I love thee not the less: from thee
The ploughman hears its humming rage begin,
Are frae their nuptial labours risen:
This makes the madmen who have made men mad
Picking the flies from orchard apple tree,
Some soothe the lab'rer's weary toil,
And who is that which knocks so late
Stalk'd round his ashes lowly laid,
Like lots of dear old neighbours whom I shall see no more
If thou art mad, my pretty lad,
When, from thy diadem, a silver gleam
His only visitants a straggling sheep,
By a swan's ebon bill; from a thick brake,
Into mine own: for why? thou openest
And the thyme it is wither'd, and rue is in prime."
How fumblin' cuifs their dearies slight;
But Selfishness, Love's cousin, held not long
When the bonnie lad that I lo'e best
Are riven out baith root and branch,
She draiglet a' her petticoatie,
To meet oblivion."--As her heart would burst
Shall he, nurst in the peasant's lowly shed,
The little sweet doth kill much bitterness;
Yet do I sometimes feel a languishment
I keep a bit on't for her sake and love her day and night.
My muse, though hamely in attire,
Yet long, long too well have I known,
I'd charm her with the magic of a switch,
Which, pure from mossy beds, did down distill,
Developing the mountains, leaves, and flowers,
But, oh! a blest relief to those
But when compar'd with real passion,
The fourth's a Highland Donald hastie,
Close bye and never stirs but baking lies,
And very, very deadliness did nip
But our ships were dead and beaten that had never feared a foe.
And day looks out with open eye,
All hail, ye tender feelings dear!
With all a poet's, husband's, father's fear!
And cups, the darlings of the eye,
Inevitable hour! 'Gainst fate to strive
Then a' 'twad gie o' joy to me,
Here's a health to them that's awa,
Those heavens are gone, the mountains grey
And wear'st thou the shield of the fam'd Britomartis?
Wha does the utmost that he can,
So gat the whissle o' my groat,
The world, and man himself, appeared a scene
O Eighty-nine, thou's but a bairn,
The vera sight o' Moodie's face,
But, dying, believe that my Willie's my ain.
Blend a celestial with a human heart;
empty urn within her withered hands,
To warm their chilliest bubbles in the grass;
Are rarely seen; nor can fair Tempe boast
When ye set by the wheel at e'en.
For unawed death at last is sure
Upon the precincts of this nest of pain,
Frosted the springing verdure of his heart;
From silken Samarcand to cedar'd Lebanon.
All are not fit with them to stir and toil,
And for the awe round fields and closen rove,
Too soon despair o'er me prevailed;
Though low and poor and broken down,
O'er life's rough ocean driven,
"O cam ye here the fight to shun,
Despising wind, and rain, and fire;
The whitethorn or the brown oak are made dearer things to me.
But as the winds the waters stir
The world has done its duty. Yet, oh yet,
And thou, my friend!--since unavailing woe
Or warm my breast with ardour to unfold
A bright spot in Eden still blooms as thy home.
A desert spreads where love should be.
An' mony a scheme in vain's been laid,
And wakes all life to noise and toil again:
Come to my bosom, my ae only dearie,
Beneath the blasts the leafless forests groan;
Most justly think (and we are much the gainers)
But it is done--succeed the verse or fail--
When shall I see such rest again?
And make my branches lift a golden fruit
We're a' noddin, nid nid noddin,
An' Claver'se got a clankie, O;
And Saturn gain'd with Thea that sad place
The worship of his lonely hour,
But twenty times, I rather wou'd be
His mighty voice may come upon the gale.
The heaped happer's ebbing still,
Hath giv'n them peace and rest,
To tremble under fortune's cummock,
As thou canst move about, an evident God;
And once, behind a rick of barley,
And all alone, set sail by silent moonlight
Ae fareweel, and then for ever!
It kindles wit, it waukens lair,
Of Basil-tufts in Florence; for it drew
And my young babie will be born,
The rising sun owre Galston muirs,
A haunting music, sole perhaps and lone
Each shrining in the midst the image of a God.
Ca' them whare the heather grows,
Had I my dear Montgomery's Peggy.
Dost not know that old Mansfield, who writes like the Bible,
As was the blink o' Phemie's ee.
And hotch'd and blew wi' might and main:
And now Childe Harold was sore sick at heart,
Or tumblin' in the boilin' flood
But could I like Montgomeries fight,
Their breath is agitation, and their life
That Fortune,--Fame,--Power,--Life, have named themselves a Star.
But as for thee, thou false woman!
She's bonnie, blooming, straight, and tall,
To teach unthankful mortals how to prize
And hear bird music here and there
Eterne Apollo! that thy Sister fair
An arch face peep'd,--an Oread as I guess'd.
O haud your tongue now, lady fair,
From over-strained might. Releas'd, he fled
Where lay the Porter, in uneasy sprawl,
Yet shall my spirit lofty converse hold
Disclose the dwelling of the mountaineer:
The boys will come and take them every day,
How brown the foliage of the green hill's grove,
A hand that from the world's bleak promontory
Such are sweet things--but sweeter still
Altho' a lad were e'er sae smart,
I love the lone green places where they be,
With the spheres of sun and moon;
And when again your dewiness he kisses,
And with calm-planted steps walk'd in austere;
But every mountain now hath found a tongue,
They reel'd, they set, they cross'd, they cleekit,
Ye'll cast your head anither airt,
And scarcely had he Maggie rallied,
To me by day or night she ever smiled,
And everything his eyes surveyed,
A hymning up to Cynthia, queen of light;
Her daughter's dying hastened on her own,
Shall hang as high's the steeple;
As doth a flower at Apollo's touch.
I know not why--but standing thus by thee
To see the sun o'er peep the eastern dimness,
A Jovian thunderbolt: arch Hebe brings
Melting to silence, when upon the breeze
On this hand sits a chosen swatch,
And not the whole combined and countless throng
His uncomb'd grizzly locks wild staring, thatch'd
Then heighten'd just above the silvery heads
There must be Gods thrown down, and trumpets blown
Turn'd--syllabling thus, "Ah, Lycius bright,
Here's a health to them that's awa,
Communion with a stirring child!
Made silken ties, that never may be broken.
And brandish round the deep-dy'd steel
They durst nae mair than he allow'd,
Down-looking, vacant, through a hazy wood,
Then he embrac'd her, and his lady's hand
Whose symmetry was not for solitude,
To deck her gay green-spreading bowers,
But I have lived, and have not lived in vain:
The red hot boiling billows foamed in the stooping clouds,
Then auld Guidman, maist like to rive,
Unseen is the lily, unheeded the rose.
He gaed wi' Jeanie to the tryste,
By mosses, meadows, moors, and fells,
In gath'rin votes you were na slack;
In trembling dotage to the feeblest fright
This sister's love with me?" Like one resign'd
Her vassals combat when their Chieftains flee,
Pillars, and frieze, and high fantastic roof,
And feeds the cows and hallos till he's hoarse;
It was some glorious form, some splendid weed,
A war-song of defiance 'gainst all hell.
Oh! there is sweetness in the mountain air,
Of hasty growth and blight, and dull Oblivion bar
But like to me she seems at loss
Their stocks  maun a' be sought ance;
Your leaves, nor ever bid the Spring adieu;
When ance life's day draws near the gloamin',
Hold sphery sessions for a season due.
In murmured pity, or loud-roared applause,
And Danger paused to pluck the flowers
By a bright something, sailing down apace,
Mov'd in these vales invisible till now?
O'er Hearts divided and o'er Hopes destroyed:
To nothing, lov'd a nothing, nothing seen
And where the bee with cowslip bells was wrestling.
Adieu! a heart-warm, fond adieu!
Fierce and sanguineous as 'twas possible
Nae unison hae they with our Creator's praise.
When, click! the string the snick did draw:
Curl upwards through the trees,
Flew a delight half-graspable; his tread
His eyes abroad, to see how shadows shifted
He toils in quiet and enjoys his health,
Yet I rejoice: a myrtle fairer than
Branch down sweeping from a tall ash top,
Of baffled foes was watched along the plain:
Her motherly cheeks. Arous'd from this sad mood
He grippet Nelly hard an' fast;
Lady! thou leadest me to summer clime,
That now perhaps thou's less deservin,
Never again saw he the happy pens
Then there's that old Lord Maurice, not a whit
Of the Spirit that plagued us so:
Gied Forth and Tay a lift aboon;
Glad was the hour, when, with thee, myriads bade
There foul neglect for months and months we bore,
Dost taunt, and deem thy power beyond
The master-mould of Nature's heavenly hand;
Before the point of his light shallop reaches
More bluely vein'd, more soft, more whitely sweet
Of young imagination have kept pure,
Gladly how would I resign thee,
Then hey for a lass wi' a tocher,
An' there will be trusty Kerroughtree,
I see the children of affliction
What matters where we fall to fill the maws
And now I have liv'd--I know not how long,
Fly in the air where his had never been--
I'll westward turn my wistful eye:
Nor need he hunt as far as Rome and Greece
And then their features started into smiles
When yon green leaves fade frae the tree,
Alake! that e'er my muse has reason
"A few short hours and He will rise
Oh Peggy she was straight and tall as is the poplar tree,
Proclaim'd the speed of winged day.
Follow'd by glad Endymion's clasped hands:
In days when riding was nae crime--
Ball, with urging lashes wealed,
Then thy spruce citizen, washed artisan,
Like music notes o' lovers' hymns:
Posies from gardens of the sweetest kind,
Here sits a raw of titlin' jades,
Health to the Maxwell's vet'ran chief!
Or found them cluster'd in the corniced shade
The joys of all his life were said and sung:
Rolled o'er the peak of the far Rhætian hill,
Of young Narcissus, and sad Echo's bale.
Those gentle limbs on mossy bed reclin'd:
Envenomed with irrevocable wrong;
Our fathers' bluid the kettle bought,
Could lift Endymion's head, or he had view'd
And now what lands between us lie,
How carols now the lusty muleteer?
He stood, and heard not Thea's sobbing deep;
O life! thou art a galling load,
An' names, like villain, hypocrite,
Yet this was in my nature:--as it is,
Web-footed alligators, crocodiles,
I sleepless lie frae e'en to morn,
Utterance thus.--"But cannot I create?
Nor look behind, nor sideways, but require
Lord Gregory started up from sleep
His bitter thoughts to other, well nigh mad
Thae curst horse-leeches o' th' Excise,
We'll o'er the water to Charlie;
When life was sweet I knew not why,
Endymion sleepeth and the lady fair.
O wilt thou share its joy wi' me,
I pass, like night, from land to land;
And as it reaches each delicious ending,
And after parting beds of simple flowers,
And whiles ye may lightly my beauty a wee;
For there, by a lanely and sequester'd stream,
When sages look'd to Egypt for their lore.
Was--the deil's awa wi' the Exciseman.
An' she has twa glancin' roguish een.
That marks the fire still sparkling in each eye,
Have heard, and heard, too, have her Saxon foes;--
And purifies from self: it is a tone,
And well the docile crew that skilful Urchin guides.
Shalt be our queen. Now, is it not a shame
Resolv'd to meet some ither day.
While Dobbin, tamed by age and labour, stands
This hour on e'enin's edge I take
Then turns and laughs but dare not further go;
Hath no revenge in it: as it is whole
Say, is not bliss within our perfect seisure?
But one vast realm of Wonder spreads around,
Sounds which will reach the Framer of all things,
When purple morning starts the hare
Brydone's brave ward  I well could spy,
That shone that hour so clearly?
'Till, quite transmugrify'd, they're grown
It was a' for our rightfu' king
For gi' me a pair of old bellows, says he,
But for a thing more deadly dark than all;
Nauntles at passer-bye and drives the boys
I sat and sang among the shrouds, a lonely sailor-boy.
That I may pass in patience still speak:
Ah, silver shrine, here will I take my rest
And monks might deem their time was come agen,
Thy hair soft-lifted by the winnowing wind;
"Lorenzo!"--here she ceas'd her timid quest,
My thoughts with Nature rather in the fields,
Peg Nicholson was a good bay mare,
The winds were laid, the air was still,
With bye and bye a brook to cross
Prove they have kings and laws, and that they be
Great Liberty! how great in plain attire!
To raise a trophy to the drama's muses.
O melody no more! for while I sang,
Unbodied choose a sanctuary.  I twine
O Father, and O Brethren, had ye felt
Did throng the muse's dangerous way,
Of Cupids shun thee, too divine art thou,
The brawnie, bainie, ploughman chiel,
And settled here for ever on its brow.
Will time, amus'd with proverb'd lore,
Shall henceforth be my music, and the Night
And crisp with frost the stubble-land.
Not such as prate of War, but skulk in Peace,
So may be, on this Pisgah height,
Idly he wandered on the Stygian shore,
Ye hae sae monie cracks an' cants,
Your news and review, Sir, I've read through and through, Sir,
While fluent Greek a vowel'd undersong
And soothing was the scene to me,
With crystal mocking of the trees and sky.
Streams that glide in orient plains,
All through my bosom: thou art as a dove
And the intent of Tyranny avowed,
Than those of sea-born Venus, when she rose
And David's crown hath passed away,
How cut-throat Prussian blades were hingin';
(And sure the power of wisdom only knows,)
Are ilka day mair sweet to hear,
I should not feel the pain of dying,
While Irwin, Lugar, Ayr, an' Doon,
So haply when I rove in some far vale,
Then might'st thou more appal--or, less desired,
Sadder than saddest night, for they distract the gaze,
For worth and honour pawn their word,
While Gentleness her milder radiance throws
A new magnificence. On oozy throne
But, ere it crept upon him, he had prest
Gin ye'll leave your Collier Laddie.
Smiling beneath a coral diadem,
And you, tho' scarce in maiden prime,
They feel the change; so let us shun the grain,
Thick night confounds the pine-tops with the clouds:
For, oh! the yellow treasure's taen
Thae winks and finger-ends, I dread,
And now the bickering storm, with sudden start,
An', for thy pains, thou'se get my blather."
At last I saw the factious knaves
When all the fair Existences of heaven
Then mounted Mirth, on gleesome wing,
And lastly, streekit out to bleach
Those files of dead, scatter the same around,
Of coming Winter's biting, frosty breath;
Or on the wealth of globed peonies;
Starlike, around, until they gathered to a God!
To Spirits against whom his own rebelled,
Along his margin a more eloquent green,
A quiver'd Dian. Stepping awfully,
Yet, think not all the rich and great
Pervaded all the beetling gloomy steeps,
But, oh! what crowds in every land,
Thy youth, in thee, thus hourly brightening,
And in his left he held a basket full
An' all the soul of love they shar'd,
Peaceful keep your dimpling wave,
Who ne in Virtue's ways did take delight;
From ten to five, from five to three,
Rivets the living links,--the enormous Asp
Unto the clover-sward, and she has talk'd
For there I took the last farewell
Of shepherds, lifting in due time aloud
How I had spent my youthfu' prime,
Where I had sunk in black despair.
Wild beats my heart to trace your steps,
Thou green-crested lapwing, thy screaming forbear--
Now worthy Gregory's Latin face,
Wheels round its dazzling spokes."--The lady's cheek
Be Anarchy curs'd, and be Tyranny damn'd;
Each man of sense has it so full before him,
So art thou not the last; it cannot be:
An ancient borough rear'd her head;
And he held up his hammer with threatens to broach
The Albatross fell off, and sank
The Poet, some guid angel help him,
Ye, lastly, bonnie blossoms a',
Courts for cowards were erected,
Ill suited law's dry, musty arts!
M'Gill's close nervous excellence,
There is a roaring in the bleak-grown pines
Seen her long locks that foil the painter's power,
I crave thy friendship at thy kind command;
But her, my bonnie sweet wee lady,
These phantoms with a nod. Lo! from the dark
But now the share uptears thy bed,
True love, it is no daring bird,
The lost breeze kissed her bright blue eye,
The creature grain'd an eldritch laugh,
He woke as from a trance; his snow-white brows
Decoy the wight that late an' drunk is,
Round the yard, a thousand ways,
The horseman hurries bye, she bolts to see,
Patting against the sorrel as she goes.
Again he rouses from his moping fits,
Who chosen is their queen,--with her fine head
And takes her tail at night in idle play,
And turns her back on sudden falling snows,
And gently turned the pony's head
And cant of tyranny in stronger power
White o'er the linns the burnie pours,
The warl' would think I was mad;
Sweet paining on his ear: he sickly guess'd
Poor Burns--e'en Scotch drink canna quicken,
I could range the world around,
An' backlins-comin', to the leuk,
Filled with the face of heaven, which, from afar,
Young playmates of the rose and daffodil,
And the casement it gave such a shake,
And mony braw thanks to the meikle black deil
In bush and brake, in black and green,
When depriv'd of her husband she loved so well,
Teazing each passing ear with murmurs vain,
Stood at the stable-door again;
The humblest of thy pilgrims passing by
But spak their thoughts in plain, braid Lallans,
And I have had my heart's rewardings.
The picture of the mind revives again:
My thoughts upon expression, and thus throw
His head weel arm'd wi' pointed spears
Whisper'd the guide, stuttering with joy, even now."
Wafts me from thee, dear shore!
Or cuifs of later times wha held the notion
Loosens her fragrant boddice; by degrees
I will tell thee my blisses, which richly abound
Woods, meadows, hedge-rows, corn-fields, all around
Now as we speed towards our joyous task."
But she was gone. Whereat the barbed shafts
And wicked fancies cross'd my mind,
I loved the song which Nature sung,
Then hurries to the door and cocks his tail,
How ye, perforce, must be content to stoop:
If any stands she runs among the poles
But who, of all the plunderers of yon Fane
That is not green, which was so through the year
Thou wert a beautiful Thought, and softly bodied forth.
Half-vacant thoughts and rhymes of careless form;
Its strength within thy walls, and was of yore
And turned a nation's shallow joy to gloom.
Light is the burden luve lays on;
Sits Darkness on his ebon throne.
Dost think that power's disguise
And yon the toast of a' the town,
May seem a span; let me thy vigils keep
And follow my love thro' the water.
Where is she, where is Betty Foy?
The Latian coast where sprung the Epic war,
Which, had I felt, these scribblings might have been
Along a path between two little streams,--
There's Johnie o' the Buskie-glen,
Of luxuries bright, milky, soft and rosy.
Into the dungeon core of that wild wood:
And much it griev'd my heart to think
Than they in doubtful time of troublous need:
The ancient pulpit trees and the play.
Into his mantle, adding wings to haste,
There's no a callant tents the kye,
Of which the throbs were born. This still alarm,
"My poor toop-lamb, my son an' heir,
And my fond heart, itsel' sae true,
An exile frae her father's ha',
How cold is that bosom which folly once fired,
On ilka brow she's planted a horn,
Cut short its immortality. Sea-flirt!
Something, that may be warnings found
Who thought it learning how to buy and sell,
Outshines our fairy-land; in shape and hues
Sae, ye observe that a' this clatter
No! as he speeds, he chants "Vivā el Rey!"
There's monie godly folks are thinkin',
Thir breeks o' mine, my only pair,
Many upon thy death have ditties made;
How many bards gild the lapses of time!
As the storms the forests tear,
Thus the fair goddess: while Endymion
And filled the bowl, and trimmed the cheerful lamp,
Seeks Science in her coy abode.
And a wave fill'd it, as my sense was fill'd
Sir Robert, a soldier, no speech would pretend,
And there to make a cot unknown to any care and pain,
Welcome what thou canst not shun.
Winnowing blythe her dewy wings
Went through the dismal air like one huge Python
The silver, snarling trumpets 'gan to chide:
In human accent: "Potent goddess! chief
Our laird gets in his racked rents,
And whistling, called the wind that hardly curled
A tod meikle waur than the clerk;
To follow it upon the open plain,
Able to face an owl's, they still are dight
And soft as their parting tear--Jessy!
Whare in the snaw the chapman smoor'd;
And thack and rape secure the toil-won crap;
Till een the breeze would knock me down,
Wi' Highland wrath they frae the sheath,
Then ty'd him fast upon a cart,
And my boat danc'd in every creek and bay;
Grunt up a solemn, lengthen'd groan,
The gipsy knocks his hands and tucks them up,
Still fan the sweet connubial flame
We ranged a' from Tweed to Spey,
Pale green pillar topped with flowers,
The more, the more I saw her dainty hue
What Psyche felt, and Love, when their full lips
If Love impersonate was ever dead,
Oh! ever loving, lovely, and beloved!
From Fez; and spiced dainties, every one,
My nets would be spread out, and I at rest.
Their verses tallied. Easy was the task:
So vanish'd: and not long, before arose
Ideal shape of such; yet still it binds
On his one ruling passion Sir Pope hugely labours,
And Jove grew languid.--Break the mesh
Believe our glowing bosoms truly feel it.
There's men o' taste wou'd tak the Ducat-stream,
And ay she set the wheel between:
This old man doing all he could
Their very graves are gone, and what are they?
Although, before the crystal heavens darken,
That slowly mount the rising steep;
Am I to be burnt up? No, I will shout,
To settled quiet: he is one by whom
Nae gowden stream thro' myrtles twines,
To fainting creatures in a desert wild.
To dip her left sark-sleeve in,
And her whole history, if ye'll hark, can tell.
Witness Troy's rival, Candia!  Vouch it, ye
--And let him nurse his fond deceit,
For some few hours the coming solitude."
At which the poor old man so long
The herryment and ruin of the country;
As late I rambled in the happy fields,
Let simple maid the lesson read,
Studied in arts of Hell, in wickedness refin'd!
To my arms their charge convey--
And hear the laugh of summer leaves above;
When she got too far off, why, I'd something to tell,
He heard it, but he heeded not--his eyes
Peer or peasant?--no such thing!
Till for his sake I'm slighted sair,
By the deep Sea, and Music in its roar:
Around thine aged top, and thy clear fount
Loud tongued, and "merry as a marriage bell,"
Commingling with her argent spheres did roll
And smiles at the far clearness all around,
His lyart haffets wearing thin an' bare;
And an attainment,--all would be in vain,--
May woman on him turn her back,
And on thy happy shore a Temple  still,
Some daring Hancock, or a Franklin';
He wander'd out he knew not where nor why)
Though always changing, in her aspect mild;
Sometimes like delicatest lattices,
Of charming my mind from the trammels of pain.
To climb the trackless mountain all unseen,
When all around was desolate and dark;
But hounds or hawks wi' him are nane;
The Mother, wi' her needle an' her shears,
And then he laid him on the bed
Of troops chivalrous prancing; through a city,
The gulphing whale was like a dot in the spell,
And painful vile oblivion seals my eyes:
He checks their course and all is calm and still.
Shall Soon wi' leaves be hinging.
Go, for yourself procure renown,
Some with upholden hand and mouth severe;
A deadly silence step by step increased,
Here winds of gentlest wing will fan his breast,
Bonnie laddie, Highland laddie,
A heavy ditty, and the sullen day
How well his Connoisseurship understands
When purple morning starts the hare,
The morning opens fine, bonny Mary O!
How she doth whisper to that aged Dame,
Shall we away?" He rous'd the steeds: they beat
When frost locks up the stream in chill delay
As round the fire the giglets keckle,
"Poor victim! no idle intruder has stood
For your auld-farrent, frien'ly letter;
The leafless trees my fancy please,
Yet never had she, well or sick,
And thou shall feed them from the squirrel's barn.
Easily onward, thorough flowers and weed.
Or to tread breathless round the frothy main,
The infant aith, half-form'd, was crusht;
And frown, to drive fair Cheerfulness away,
Hale be your heart! Hale be your fiddle!
What then? poor beastie, thou maun live!
A holiness appealing to all hearts;
Sweet is the moonlight on the tree,
Wi' kindling eyes cry'd "Willie, rise!
It's just the blue-gown badge and claithing
An' she has twa sparkling roguish een
And other joys my fancy to allure;
I know the poisons of the shade,
And can I ever bid these joys farewell?
Most innocent, perhaps--and what if guilty?
Thus Harold inly said, and passed along,
Than if a Pyramid formed his monumental fane.
And hollow whistled in the rocky cave.
to sunset they would sip of the tea, drink of the beer, and eat of the
When all great Latmos so exalt will be?
Then what is Life?--When stripped of its disguise,
Her darling amusement, the hounds and the horn.
Till now amaist on every knowe,
Kissing thy daily food from Naiad's pearly hands.
Round, vast, and spanning all like Saturn's ring?
An' what poor cot-folk pit their painch in,
And rambling bramble-berries, pulp and sweet,
The lav'rocks they were chantin'
Thy drapery floats so gracefully;
Now turn we to our former chroniclers.--
And then he shut his little eyes,
He sung his old songs and forgot his old mill--
There thou too, Vathek! England's wealthiest son,
I can repeople with the past--and of
We'll tak a cup o' kindness yet,
Were twisted, gracefu', round her brows,
'My spouse and boys dwell near thy hall,
But little thinks my luve I ken brawlie
Were ye but here to share my wounded feelings!
Passing along before a dusky space
Hedge-grown primrose that hath burst;
The first I'll name, they ca'd him Cæsar,
Of that dark gulph he wept, and said: "I urge
And tore his patents all in two,
Most piously;--all lovers tempest-tost,
Roars, howls, and stifled murmurs never cease;
It stands erect this aged thorn;
'Tis in the breath of heaven: thou dost taste
A wider space--an ornamented grave?
Will in a few short hours be nothing to me,
No horns, but those by luckless Hymen worn,
Their galloping thro' public places,
The Bactrian, Samian sage, and all who taught the Right!
The spring is coming by a many signs;
An' syne Mess John, beyond expression,
An' mony a time my heart's been wae,
Spangler of clouds, halo of crystal rivers,
Here Holy Willie's sair worn clay
My blessin's upon thy bonnie e'e brie!
The half asleep start up wi' fear,
In the sweet shire of Cardigan,
Not in the legends of the first of days,
By all the echoes that about thee ring,
For her dear sake, and hers alone!
O let me for one moment touch her wrist;
But one sad losel soils a name for ay,
Even when I feel as true as innocence?
An' views beyond the grave comfort him,
The least of nature's works, one who might move
So ended Saturn; and the God of the Sea,
And vile Ambition, that built up between
The same--and still the more, the more it breaks;
His silent sandals swept the mossy green;
Her very cheek against my crowned lip,
Italia too! Italia! looking on thee,
I told thee of, where lovely Scylla lies;
Her lips, like roses, wat wi' dew,
We stand as captives, and would not depart.
My heart did glowing transport feel,
The permanent crags, tell here of Love, who sought
Whose dwelling is the light of setting suns,
Away! away! for I will fly to thee,
An immortality of passion's thine:
Had all but crowned him, on the selfsame day
The rill runs o'er--and round, fern, flowers, and ivy, creep
While far within each aisle and deep recess,
Had I strength I would just be for helping a friend
For there's none like him living--save his man.
Rebounding idly on her strength did light:--
(Lang after kenn'd on Carrick shore;
Stop, passenger!--my story's brief,
Pedestal'd haply in a palace court,
And home has gone the weary bee!
But gin the Lord's ain focks gat leave,
Here, to the wrongs of fate half reconcil'd,
He bends and scampers oer the elting soil,
The ground parched and cracked is like overbaked bread,
With thine Elysian water-drops; the face
Wad make me langer wish to tarry;
Of gods and men, great Nemesis! did he die,
Of the most living crystal that was e'er
She lifted up the charm: appealing groans
No savage e'er could rend my heart
Through; where the maidens they reclined
And blasted be thy murder-aiming eye;
O'er the World's wilderness, and vainly pants
With such a glow of beauty in his eyes,
To learn _bon ton_, an' see the worl'.
By threatening round his head in many rings:
He made that cunning entrance I described:
And hath denied, to every other sky,
Of human words! roughness of mortal speech!
Till down my weary bones I lay,
Bide the surging billow's shock.
When moon and stars are shining bright
Down by yon stream, and yon bonnie castle green;
Reader, attend--whether thy soul
We'll toyte about wi' ane anither;
Then may'st thou be restored; but not till then.
The wedding-guest sate on a stone,
Nature reigns and rules the whole;
The dullest sailer wearing bravely now--
For her good neighbour, Susan Gale,
And would be all or nothing--nor could wait
And deep is the sigh of his breath,
Aft yont the dyke she's heard you bummin,
I see thy life is stuff o' prief,
With the black tempest of a winter night
For using thy name offers fifty excuses.
Syne bade her gae in, for a b--h and a w--e,
Without the power to crush the feeble worms
He play'd an ancient ditty, long since mute,
All garlanded with carven imag'ries
Is all a-hunger'd. Thou, Oceanus,
And strike, albeit with untaught melody,
"Weel, weel!" says I, "a bargain be't;
Like to bubbles when rain pelteth;
Him whom you love, your idiot boy?
A murderer's banes in gibbet airns;
The girdin brak, the beast cam down,
When every maiden went by with her spark
And thro' they dash'd, and hew'd, and smash'd,
And smiles, with his star-cheering voice sweetly blending,
The frighted women take the boys away,
Since she (her name is Martha Ray)
What says she, my dearest, my Phely?
In that absorbing sigh perchance more blest
"The social, friendly, honest man,
She would weep that her wild bees
Now Harold felt himself at length alone,
"All that we know is, nothing can be known."
Blest cares! all other feelings far above!
There a lone couple lived, secluded there
Say, maiden, can thy life be led
Our right of thought--our last and only place
As fit and suiting to his rude employ;
What crimes it costs to be a moment free,
Of flowers, rush of rivers, and the tombs
Thou emblem, said I, o' my Phillis,
Poor silly wretch, he's damn'd himsel'
A few short months, and glad and gay,
The lisping infant prattling on his knee,
They ne'er shall draw a wish frae me,
Though seen of none save him whose strenuous tongue
The Proteus of their talents: But his own
Beneath the willow trees they ride and stoop--
And the toper he hiccuped--which hindered an oath--
The blind met daylight in his eye,
The poet's harp--the voice of friends--the sun;
As, dangling in the wind, he hangs
That, near a cavern's mouth, for ever pour'd
But dares not look behind, or all the charm is fled.
He is an evening reveller, who makes
While fragrance blooms and beauty charms!
A rustling noise of leaves, and out there flutter'd
By the bonnie lass o' Ballochmyle.
Then gently scan your brother man,
Endure and shrink not, we of nobler clay
Where swarms of minnows show their little heads,
Flared, here and there, from wealthy festivals,
Away in solitude? And must they wane,
Thy waist sae jimp, thy limbs sae clean,
I hope to gie the jads a clearin'
Thy trust--and thy example, too.
Desponding, o'er the marble floor's cold thrill.
And now she sits her down and weeps;
Was shrivelled to a withered weed and trampled down and done,
"You look round on your mother earth,
Until he reach'd the great main cupola;
'Tis sorrow enough on that visage to gaze.
Thou busy pow'r, Remembrance, cease!
He deems their colours shall endure
But Mauchline race, or Mauchline fair;
Mightiest of many such! Hence let me trace
With hopes that you would one day think the reading
Its columns strew the wilderness, and dwell
Her silk had play'd in purple phantasies,
Sae shortly you shall see me bright,
Grateful the incense from the lime-tree flower;
Much, that may give us pause, if pondered fittingly.
"Thy line, that have struggled for freedom with Bruce,
Hereat, she vanished from Endymion's gaze,
See, how she fetches at the thrapple,
E'en thigger at your doors an' yetts,
Of eye and ear, both what they half-create,[5]
Rumbles reluctant o'er our fallen house;
And bites them through--the drunkard swears and reels.
With fairy fishes from the mountain tarn,
When trystin-time draws near again;
With hands held back, and motionless, amaz'd
Fancying that ghosts may wake, and leave their graves by day.
Lingering like me, perchance, to gaze, and sigh "Alas!"
To show Sir Bardie's willyart glow'r,
The Goth was stalking round with anxious search,
Save echo, faint repeating o'er and o'er
A merry tune which I had known full long,
Blithe Bessie in the milking shiel,
Next on the cat-tail-grass with farther bound
Heaven, I thought, was in her air;
Were sayin' or takin' aught amiss:
More bleak to view the hills at length recede,
﻿A faithless shepherd courted me,
O'er studded with a thousand, thousand pearls,
By nightshade, ruby grape of Proserpine;
Heav'n mak you guid as weel as braw,
The moments, by some greedy help that seem'd
Whether they wept, or laugh'd, or griev'd, or toy'd--
Yet am I changed; though still enough the same
Friend of the Poet, tried and leal,
And plac'd in midst of all that lovely lass
Fools our fond gaze, and greatest of the great
Shuffling along with ivory-headed wand,
'Till, crash! the cruel coulter past
Thin streets, and foreign aspects, such as must
If, while a half-slumber his memory bedims,
Then thro' the lakes Montgomery takes,
And in your lug, most reverend James,
Princes and lords are but the breath of kings,
An' unco tales, an' funnie jokes,
'Twere better far to hide my foolish face?
My tocher's the jewel has charms for him.
Than Art in galleries: though a work divine
Nor blush for those who conquered on that plain;
Love never dies, but lives, immortal Lord:
A voice came sweeter, sweeter than all tune,
See not her charms! Is Phœbe passionless?
Muse! formed or fabled at the Minstrel's will!
For a' his fresh beef and his saut,
There was an awful rainbow once in heaven:
When he shall hear the wedding lutes a playing.--
"What makes that ship drive on so fast?
Grows lush in juicy stalks, I'll smoothly steer
We are na fou, we're no that fou,
Exhal'd to Phœbus' lips, away they are gone,
And your skulls are a storehouse of lead.
For this in such as him seems strange of mood,
Look full upon it feel anon the blue
In the same dust and blackness, and we pass
Was, that same night she neer a wish exprest
The weary pund, the weary pund,
Oh Peggy was the young thing and bonny as to size;
And haps me fiel and warm at e'en!
Here dwells the caloyer, nor rude is he,
And that's wi' Willie Chalmers.
Oak apples on the tree; and wilt thou gang to see
Thou's welcome again to thy ain Jock Rab.
And almost stifled with her bliss,
Even now to re-assume the imperial mien,
While like a sea the storming army came,
For fear amaist did swarf, man!"
A guid New-year I wish thee, Maggie!
The lady, ever watchful, penetrant,
And wi' your pleading let me be;
Have been content to let occasion die,
A being form'd t'amuse his graver friends,
And the half-wasted dog squats close and rubs,
O saw ye my dearie, my Eppie M'Nab?
Yet in the morning fresh afield they hie,
Men, dogs, and horses, all are dead;
By many streams a little lake did fill,
Adieu, fair Cadiz! yea, a long adieu!
Would I hae fear'd them a', man?"
To paint those charms which varied as they beamed--
Tall chesnuts keep away the sun and moon:--
Now gay with the bright setting sun;
And in the keen, yet tender eye,
The ploughman beat him till his ribs would crack,
From clouds, but of all colours seems to be,--
Where'er he go, where'er he stray.
To take a latest glimpse at his sheep-fold,
Alive, and dazzling cool, and with a sound,
Nor grew they pale, as mortal lovers do.
And 'tis my faith that every flower
To sue her gentle ears for whose fair head,
In nightly revels or in city streets;
The cloudy rack slow journeying in the west,
Seem to re-echo all they mourn in vain;
The thorns which I have reaped are of the tree
Charms--kindred--children--with the silver gray
Strong may she glow with all her ancient fire:
Thou seest, and he would gaze till it became
Thou art sae thriftless o' thy sweets,
With heart-struck anxious care, inquires his name,
I' th' ither warl', if there's anither,
Inhabited her frail-strung heart as his.
While huddling clouds of purple dye
Bear this in mind--be deaf and blind;
If mair they deave us wi' their din,
When busy Memory flashes on my brain?
Upon a dead thing's face my hand I laid;
Ah Nick! ah Nick! it is na fair,
Through which this Paphian army took its march,
And ane wad rather fa'n than fled;
Wherever I wander, wherever I rove,
With grandeurs false and mock display,
But neither Doctor nor his guide
And thus equipped, they softly pass
May couthie fortune, kind and cannie,
Now Sark rins o'er the Solway sands,
Edges them round, and they have golden pits:
My sabre shall win what the feeble must buy;
Each year brings forth its millions--but how long
The ways of men are distant brought,
When by such heads and hearts directed--
And on the sunny banks they dare not go
Monarchs partook, and deemed their dignity increased.
Then let us fight about, Dumourier;
And hung with heavy tufts of moss,
and seems to fancy you are in the town.
Changing her watchet hue for sombre weed;
May He who made him still support him,
I thought upon the banks o' Coil,
That what we have of feeling most intense
Happier, that, while all younger hearts shall bleed,
She thinks no more of deadly sin;
We drank a health to bonnie Mary.
Fell source o' monie a pain an' brash!
From mouth to mouth through ages handles down.
But in Man's dwellings he became a thing
Beneath the lightning and the moon
Now's the day, and now's the hour--
She's gotten the heart of a Bushby,
And without utterance, save the shrug or sigh,
Longed for a deathless lover from above,
I should be proud to meet you there!
Rigwoodie hags, wad spean a foal,
On commons where pined sheep and oxen lie
From the old womb of night, his cave forlorn
Tho' leeward whyles, against my will,
A night o' guid fellowship sowthers it a':
By human pride or cunning driv'n
Saw him in shootin' graith adorn'd,
And Betty from the lane has fetched
Were such the wife had fallen to my part,
For an auld man shall never daunton me.
The fair-haired Daughter of the Isles is laid,
Are fairy folk, in splendid masquerade
With many windings, through the vale:--Look back!
Look on that part which sacred doth remain
An auld wife's tongue's a feckless matter
Of mighty Poets is made up; the scroll
And as she mutter'd "Well-a--well-a-day!"
And as she leaves me may she often turn
But whether 'twas the Deil himsel',
Of death, depopulation, bondage, fears,
Envy, and Malice to their native sty?
Repairs the wrongs that Quito's sons sustained,
Where sat Endymion and the aged priest
Hail the bright clime of Battle and of Song:
Strange birds like snowspots oer the whizzing sea
Here is one fytte  of Harold's pilgrimage:
Nae mercy, then, for airn or steel;
For something beyond it poor man sure must live.
And homeless near a thousand homes I stood,
Nae star blinks thro' the driving sleet:
And Common Sense is gaun, she says,
While flattery listens to the chimes,
Would passion arm me for the enterprize:
Her ebon urn, young Mercury, by stealth,
The Miller was strappin, the Miller was ruddy;
For sighs are idle things and vain,
Slowly across the chequer'd shadows pass.
The mellow ditties from a mourning tongue?--
The cold sweat melted from their limbs,
For 'twas the morn: Apollo's upward fire
And, muse and marvel where we may,
And fall of lofty fountains, and the bend
"Ye, for my sake, hae gi'en the feck,
Justice, the high vicegerent of her God,
But plain it is, the thorn is bound
Yet in lone places forced to stray--
The shepherd called the ploughman to the fray;
Had taken fairy phantasies to strew
And moisten'd it with tears unto the core.
Since now he vainly urged him to adore,
And now, with gleams of half-extinguish'd thought,
All human; bearing in themselves this good,
That body dismiss'd from his care;
To join the midnight mystery's rout,
Aboon them a' ye tak your place,
In imitation of the things  they feared,
As spectacled she sits in chimney nook.
Some started on their feet; some also shouted;
Of that which is of all Creator and Defence.
Where walks the spirit in a winding-sheet,
Scarce fan the weed that lingers green below
Fall'n nations gaze on Spain; if freed, she frees
Which out of things familiar, undesigned,
And now she's at the doctor's door,
So, till morrow-morning's come,
For, Lord be thankit, I can plough;
The Song is heard, the rosy Garland worn;
In all save form alone, how changed! and who
Or swans upon a gentle waterfall.
Thee to thy native hopes. O thou hast won
But oft, in lonely rooms, and mid the din
Here, Doon pour'd down his far-fetch'd floods;
Sweet'ner of life and solder of society!
Not with their blind forefathers' simple views,
But Clinton's glaive frae rust to save,
Fondly we wished, and wished away, nor knew,
Foil'd, bleeding, tortur'd, in the unequal strife,
And here I bid it die. Have not I caught,
Ah, happy, happy boughs! that cannot shed
Maggie coost her head fu' high,
His steed and he right well agree,
My readers still are sure to lose me.
Broad leav'd are they and their white canopies
The silent mysteries of earth, descend!"
The cobweb'd gothic dome resounded Y!
And a sad ditty of this story born
Might live, and show itself to human eyes.
All others' scorn--but damn that ass's heel.
O words are poor receipts for what time hath stole away,
Better our dying bodies to obtrude,
To get the seeds of wild flowers, and to plant them
Ye woodland choir that chant your idle loves,
He thinks his master's horses far the best,
And to the doctor's door she hies;
And that, alas! is death. No, I can trace
So trembling, pure, was tender love
But still the patriot, and the patriot bard,
Here lies a mock Marquis, whose titles were shamm'd;
In your unletter'd nameless faces!
And by thy een, sae bonnie blue,
That fill the skies with silver glitterings!
Yet mark their mirth--ere Lenten days begin,
When last the sun his autumn tresses shook,
To grace this d--d infernal clan."
Which he, in sooth, long led to Victory,
My voice sounds much--and fall the stars' faint rays
A mist retreating from the morning sun,
O raging fortune's withering blast
Its mistress' lips? Not thou?--'Tis Dian's: lo!
Shall be a mansion for all lovely forms,
There's not a bonnie bird that sings,
Is all that's left of what had used to be,
What once was a butterfly, gay in life's beam:
Yes! sighed o'er Delphi's long deserted shrine,
To all save Carnage, that, beneath the fray,
Dew-dropping melody, in the Carian's ear;
And says, "Ye need na yoke the plough,
Here's a health to them that's awa;
Those strains that once did sweet in Zion glide,
Who dives three fathoms where the waters run
Would seem a feather to the mighty prize.
Wi' pinch I pat a Sunday's face on,
They fish all day the weedy mud,
How His first followers and servants sped,
Of thee we now should ask forgiving boon;
Yet has so keen a relish of its pleasures?
See, through the trees, a little river go
Anon she took a branch of mistletoe,
My voice upon the mountain-heights; once more
When he felt that a stiver had got to his knee
An' every star within my hearin'!
Leeze me on drink! it gies us mair
The sun proclaims him through the day,
I set me down wi' right good-will,
In glory that old Darkness: nor are we
And now she's high upon the down,
And much she marvelled that a youth so raw
'Till billows rage, and gales blow hard,
To the new race of inborn slaves, who wage
And rose, with spicy fannings interbreath'd,
Of her consuming cheek the autumnal leaf-like red.
Masts, spires, and strand retiring to the right,
A garter, which a babe had strangled;
Or the light whisper of her footstep soft;
He neer went fifty miles in all his life.
Till love came upon thee like the sun to the west
An' if ye mak' objections at it,
Yet to that heart, ah! still how dear!
Within the opposing scale, which crushes soon or late,--
What's said or done he never hears or minds
My greedy thirst with nectarous camel-draughts;
By barber woven, and by barber sold,
"No!" exclaimed he, "why should I tarry here?"
Long years of misery have told me so.
There came upon my face, in plenteous showers,
Brother of Jove, and co-inheritor
That right to fluttering female hearts the nearest,
Why should we shrink from what we cannot shun?
In durance vile here must I wake and weep,
And still his precious self his dear delight;
Who when as boys searched every sedgy lane,
For you to try my dull, unlearned quill.
The myrtle sicken'd in a thousand wreaths.
When by a generous Public's kind acclaim,
Where th' howlet mourns in her ivy bower
Hushed is the din of tongues--on gallant steeds,
Where loudest winds--almost as summer's breath--
And find thee still true-hearted;
An' gied the infant world a shog,
And now it tells me, that in worlds unknown,
When roving thro' the garden gay,
That's the true pathos and sublime
And past the birks and meikle stane,
Nor muffling thicket interpos'd to dull
And as he tun'd his doleful sang,
This much, dear Maid, accord; nor question why
And one, sure enough, tramples up to the door,
Swifter than sight was gone--even before
I hae sworn by the Heavens to my Mary,
Her leafy locks wave in the breeze,
And lifting up his head, he then would gaze
For me, my faculties are frozen,
No word return'd: both lovelorn, silent, wan,
And fly from all I prized the most:
And often tries to mount her back and ride,
Into another, she began to sing,
E'er bring you in by Mauchline Cross,
Thrown in our eyes, genders a novel sense,
Revive, or these soft hours will hurry by
Our hopes such harvest of affliction reap,
Sits upright on a feeding horse?
Tak this frae me, my bonnie hen,
Dip so refreshingly its wings, and breast
Spring, Summer, Autumn, cannot match me;
The one was fire and fickleness,  a child
Oh what can ail thee Knight at arms
What do, and what to leave undone,
This was deny'd, it was affirm'd;
Or pranks the sod in frolic mood,
Ca' them where the burnie rowes--
When he went to drink next that the bottom was bared.
Shall be resolved to something less than this--
Of pale-mouth'd prophet dreaming.
And gave the steel a shining quite transcendent.
On lofty aiks the cushats wail,
How rich the hawthorn's blossom,
He had unlawful thoughts of many things:
An' the wee pouts begun to cry,
A workhouse! ah, that sound awakes my woes,
The noisy domicile of pedant pride;
Tho' poortith hourly stare him;
Cov'ring half thine ivory breast;
Hopes sapped, name blighted, Life's life lied away?
Because of some great urgency and need
Tho' wandering now, must be my doom,
Some herds, weel learn'd upo' the beuk,
Knowing that Nature never did betray
With deeper crimson, and a double smart?
And, grumbling, he went back to bed.
Like a lithe serpent vast and muscular
Has it been ever sounding for those ears
Till speedless trials prove the doubted elf
Cost Scotland blood--cost Scotland tears;
Philosophy will clip an Angel's wings,
Fair Scylla and her guides to conference;
This seraph-band, each wav'd his hand:
And, climb we eer so soft the spinney rails,
But, dying, believe that my Willie's my ain.
Soars fancy's flights beyond the pole,
Rude is the tent this architect invents,
Let sage or cynic prattle as he will,
From scenes like these, old Scotia's grandeur springs,
Compare wi' bonnie Brigs o' modern time?
With love--he--but alas! too well I see
Never to turn again.--Away they went,
Like to a native lily of the dell:
The hero of the mimic scene, no more
With death, as life. The ancient harps have said,
Twas in that place o' Scotland's isle
The birds sung sweet in ilka grove;
The chilly frost, beneath the silver beam,
As thou thyself must shortly find,
Bonnie laddie, Highland laddie;
By mony a flow'r and spreading tree,
Yestreen I met you on the moor,
A vast idea before me, and I glean
Are flowers the winter's choice?
In baskets of bright osier'd gold were brought
And, though with cautious steps his sports begin,
And 'tis but echo'd from departing sound,
With thought--He is insensibly subdued
Scarce saw in all the room another face,
And airy cradle, lowly bow'd his face
Upon the clouds? Has she not shewn us all?
And blank leaves once, now filled with kindred claims,
At sight of whom our Sprites forgat their kindling wrath.
On libbard's paws, upheld the heavy gold
'Till crush'd beneath the furrow's weight,
Spirits of grief, sing not your "Well-a-way!"
With blood upon their heads, to banishment.
Or by ethereal things that, unconfin'd,
He has cooper'd and ca'd a wrong pin in't.
Some fewer whigmeleeries in your noddle.
Trenching your gushing entrails bright
Cynthia is from her silken curtains peeping
To h--ll, if he's gane thither,
From her ten thousand tyrants turn to thee,
They steal from Jack-a-Lantern's tails
While love's luxurious pulse beat high,
Of all the congregated world, to fan
Oh, I had wooers aught or nine,
Thus bold, independent, unconquer'd, and free,
Tho' blotch'd an' foul wi' mony a stain,
Cupids a slumbering on their pinions fair.
I lang hae thought, my youthfu' friend,
They darken'd the air, and they plunder'd the land:
Suffer my genial spirits to decay:
The stranger fain would linger on his way!
There are, and many formed of flesh and bones.
Between themselves they were sae busy:
Again my trooping hounds their tongues shall loll
This day Mackinlay taks the flail,
For one, he said, to labour bred,
Cloys with tasting: What do then?
Their heads appear'd, and up their stature grew
When we shall meet in pure elysium.
The eagle landed him, and farewel took.
I send you more than India boasts
Where Pedantry gulls Folly--we have eyes:
No mercenary bard his homage pays;
Whose prayers for thee, each morn and evening,
I've paced much this weary, mortal round,
For a' the life of life is dead,
Come hither, lady fair, and joined be
O think how sweet to me the freshening sluice!
Of sated Grandeur from the city's noise:
Now Johnny all night long had heard
Ever as if just rising from a sleep,
To talk of "Lunun" as a foreign land.
My passion I will ne'er declare,
Quoth she, and whistled thrice.
And deify me, as if some blithe wine
She promis'd fair and perform'd but ill;
Collecting, mimick'd the wrought oaken beams,
Veiled by the screen of hills: here men are few,
In starlight, by the three Hesperides.
Or by mysterious enticement draw
And tarrying neighbours that at market wait,
Of Consciousness awaking to her woes,
Have pity for poor mariners, ye landsmen, in a storm.
An' there will be Buittle's  apostle,
What gen'rous manly bosoms feel,
Last eve in Beauty's circle proudly gay;
O could I feel her faith again!
That in a little cottage I have found;
For thy destructive charms; then, still untired,
The kirk and state may gang to hell,
His loath'd existence through ten centuries,
Mark, how their lofty independent spirit
Sprinkle its coolness, and from the dry dust
The deil tak his taste to gae near her!
Not with that affectation, praise
But Folly has raptures to give.
An' tho' yon lowin heugh's thy hame,
My grannie she bought me a beuk,
The groaning trees untimely shed their locks,
And Storm, and Darkness, ye are wondrous strong,
Huge dens and caverns in a mountain's side:
Yes, I will be thy priest, and build a fane
Up from the earth these mosses creep,
Parting they seem'd to tread upon the air,
Drooped as a wild-born falcon with clipt wing,
Are there not other regions than this isle?
A dreary night of love and misery,
Classed among creatures, when the soul can flee,
But what could ye other expect,
(Fit haunts for friendship or for love,)
Six bottles a-piece had well wore out the night,
So once more he had wak'd and anguished
There is a rapture on the lonely shore,
'Tis a concealment needful in extreme;
And small birds chirp and startle with affright;
I winna lie, come what will o' me,)
What is right and what is wrang, by the law?
He's the king o' guid fellows and wale of auld men;
Where waters flow and wild woods wave,
What tender vows our last sad kiss delayed!
Come as of wont; for I would fain intrude,
What wealth could never give nor take away.
Fays, Spunkies, Kelpies, a', they can explain them,
"Begone, foul dream!" he cried, gazing again
Came Megara before me, and behind
Free-voic'd as one who never was away.
But sax Scotch miles thou try't their mettle,
To sue thee to his heart? Kind stranger-youth!
Whose rhymes you'll perhaps, Sir, ne'er deign to peruse:
Ye men of wit and wealth, why all this sneering
Here every tree is strange to me,
Throw not my words away, as many do;
My toil-beat nerves, and tear-worn eye,
Death in the front, Destruction in the rear!
But aye she blush'd, and aye she sigh'd,
May ill befa' the flattering tongue
The yellowhammer flutters in short fears
He had twa fauts, or may be three,
And cruelty directs the thickening blows;
"O welcome, most kindly," the blythe carle said,
Discount what scant occasion gave,
They cooper'd at e'en, they cooper'd at morn,
I'll visit thee for this, and kiss thine eyes,
The sweetest thought that leaves the brain,
Is looking round about him with a fond,
Since my last hope and last comfort is gone!
Its health--but what it then detested, still abhor.
Nor Torture shake, or mine would now be cold and dumb.
This may do--maun do, Sir, wi' them wha
And must we part? Ah, yes, it must be so.
Blush, Caledonia! such thy son could be!
And wha but my fine fickle lover was there!
But he was gleg as onie wumble,
When, past all hindrance of my trembling hands,
Until they came to where these streamlets fall,
Look not so wilder'd; for these things are true,
And now we're dern'd in glens and hallows,
These be thy guardian and reward;
The shepherd on his journey heard when nigh
Would take _His_ hand, whose vernal tints
Or Fergusson, the writer chiel,
The woods, wild scatter'd, clothe their ample sides;
But no confusion, no disturbance rude
We'll big a house,--a wee, wee house,
The thought of that same chariot, and the strange
When trouble haunts me, need I sigh?
An' few there be that ken me, O;
But raise your arm, an' tell your crack
Sigh forth one wish that such had been his lot,
Nor care what land thou bear'st me to,
An, wi' the weary warl' fought!
Who ever would love or be tied to a wife
To meditate amongst decay, and stand
For many a time and oft were heard
"Ah! why wilt thou affright a feeble soul?
"So, as I said, next morn I heard the bell,
Nature herself seems on the flitting.
Went swift beneath the merry-winged guide,
"Conscience," says I, "ye thowless jad!
While tears hap o'er her auld brown nose!
When market-morning came, the neat attire
More did I love to lie in cavern rude,
Repented he, but in his bosom slept
And flops about the shepherd where he lies;
And rubious-argent: of all these bereft,
I am the man: and thus may still
As flowers are by the summer wind.
The frequent chequer of a youngling tree,
--Why bustle thus about your door,
Thine honied tongue--lute-breathings, which I gasp
Disease and famine, agony and fear,
Nae tawted tyke, though e'er sae duddie,
Her dawning love-look rapt Endymion blesses
Glanced many a light Caique along the foam,
Should it e'er be so, what a rich content!
My fire is dead, and snowy white
Ye've heard this while how I've been licket,
The faintly marked distant hill:
Like cloud on cloud. No stir of air was there,
And I rejoice in my bonnie Bell.
This furrow'd visage thou hadst never seen.
Through frosty hills the journey lay,
One shakes the forests, and one spurns the ground:
While through her yellow teeth the spittle hist,
But there came one, who with a kindred hand
Night's daughter, Ignorance,  hath wrapt and wrap
The little shepherd in his white capote
Here passes the squire on his brother--his horse;
Full swells the deep pure fountain of young life,
The pond--and thorn, so old and grey,
With its own flickering, or a sword laid by,
From her dead eyes; and many a curious elf,
Fell source o' a' my woe an' grief;
She, honest woman, may think shame
Beyond thee, dearie, beyond thee, dearie,
Was mine; till love has o'er me past,
Yet well thy soul hath brooked the turning tide
He could not help but kiss her and adore.
He ventur'd the soul, and I risk'd the body,
Dark despair around benights me.
"Oh dear, dear pony! my sweet joy!
And a' your views may come to nought,
Sae blythe and merry we will be
Of gem and marble, to encrust the bones
A ruin amidst ruins; there to track
Not by its fault--but thine: Our outward sense
For my puir, silly, rhymin clatter
To horse! to horse! he quits, for ever quits
With thoughtless joy I stretch'd along the shore
His hoary cheek was wet wi' tears;
And ev'n the vera deils they brawly ken them.)
When ye bure hame my bonnie bride:
And sweet is night in autumn mild
Bless Jesus Christ, O Cardoness,
How turn to left, and how to right.
"And when the ground was white with snow,
The little birdies blithely sing,
O gentle reader! you would find
And she had died in drowsy ignorance,
Back to the struggle, baffled in the strife,
Like laurels on the bald first Cæsar's head--
Of fame around a restless world,
Not for thy faults, but mine: it is a curse
As thy deep waters now are flowing.
My Spirit shall resume it--if we may
He gaz'd, he wish'd, he fear'd, he blush'd--
Of Johnny's wit and Johnny's glory.
Give over for pity--my Nannie's awa!
Which slope his green path downward to the shore,
Would give a pang to jealous misery,
Which emanated then, and dazzles now,
Proves half the members nought but bribery's tools,
I've measured it from side to side:
Come, gies your hand, an' sae we're gree't;
In him alone. Can Nature show so fair?
And Sackville dour, wha stood the stoure,
The carlin claught her by the rump,
The nuthatch noises loud in wood and wild,
We've worn to crazy years thegither;
Who thus were ripe for high contemplating,
For on this morn three potent Nations meet,
And throws the water oer his wings.
What canst thou say or do of charm enough
While life a pleasure can afford,
"I fear thee and thy glittering eye
An' please themsels wi' countra sports,
Shall we, who struck the Lion down, shall we
Her lips were cherries of the spring and hazel were her eyes.
That merry day the year begins,
Over his waned corse, the tremulous shower
But to each other dream, and nightly weep.
Do but try to develope his hooks and his crooks;
Beseeming all men ill, but most the man
With reverence, though to one who knew it not.
Alane can delight me--now Nannie's awa!
Of Hyacinthus, when the cruel breath
Thy favours are the silly wind,
But I'se believe ye kindly meant it,
The pewit, swopping up and down
A Palace and a prison on each hand:
The gentleman in word an' deed,
O wert thou, love, but near me;
Now while the early budders are just new,
How silent comes the water round that bend;
To pit some havins in his breast!
To thy Sire's heart, replenishing its source
The rolling stream, the precipice's gloom,
Thine ear, and find thy gentle heart; so well
No, no-where can unriddle, though I search,
And up the steep barbarian Monarchs ride,
Were like old neighbours with their country face.
So keep ye quiet till my story's told,
Aboon them a' it pleas'd me best,
Was woven in with black distinctness; storm,
Far from human haunts and ways;
Prisoned in marble--bubbling from the base
And what perceive; well pleased to recognize
The tide-swol'n Firth, with sullen sounding roar,
For sparkling was the rosy wine,
Ere mingling with the herd had penned me in their fold.
Moozing cool sheltered neath the skirting woods,
That all was over on this side the tomb,
If, in the vale of humble life,
Her mouth foam'd, and the grass, therewith besprent,
The wondering spirits of heaven were mute,
Wi' his proud, independent stomach,
Each hill and dale, each deepening glen and wold
And yawning forth a grave for those who lay
How wanton thy waters her snowy feet lave,
Through lands scarce noticed in historic tales:
Oft has thy silent-marking glance
And O it is delicious, when the day
Seek their warm straw-littered shed,
If aught of young Remembrance then remain,
A being more intense that we endow
It is the first mild day of March:
Tho' real friends, I b'lieve, are few,
We'll cry nae jads frae heathen hills
For Embro' wells are grutten dry.
Thou'st heard the knave supply his canting powers
Auld Orthodoxy lang did grapple,
The passing crowded stage coach reeling bye.
That echoes far from hill to hill.
To Lucifer or Baal, when he'd pine
His wandering steps, and half-entranced laid
(Lord keep me ay frae a' temptation!)
That stream'd through Wallace's undaunted heart:
The frost may freeze the deepest sea;
Circled with evil, till his very soul
Some cock or cat your rage maun stop,
I turned to thee, to thousands, of whom each
Ere aught thy manly courage shake,
Your pride's done wrong enough as now
My warst word is--"Welcome, and welcome again!"
Do proper homage to thine Idol's eyes;
Or must no tiny sin to others fall,
At the bath's edge, and keeps a gentle motion
Whose head is pregnant with poetic lore.
But where is your shield from the darts of contempt?
As a' the priests had seen me get thee
Where lambkins wanton thro' the broom!
But then he is a horse that thinks!
Tell her she was the bishop's whore.
Twas the old vicar's way who should be right,
How kindly did they paint their vagrant ease!
And float with them about the summer waters.
But by the brutes themselves eleckit,
Where sits our sulky sullen dame,
To watch and premier o'er the pack vile,
Of awfuller shade, or an enchanted grot,
Those eyes, those passions, those supreme pearl springs,
'Twixt Nothing and Creation, I here swear,
Fatal to him who bears, to all who ever bore.
Upon that night, when fairies light
Can harbour, dark, the selfish aim,
My flock, it seemed to melt away.
What though, for showing truth to flatter'd state
Ay, knelt and worshipped on, as love in beauty's bower,
As on the banks of Ayr I stray'd,
The life from out young hearts, and choking sighs
And speaks in thunder through yon engine's roar:
And tears of triumph their reward prolong!
For little fish that nimble bye
Stiff-holden shields, far-piercing spears, keen blades,
Then lea'e the lassie till her fate,
A scene where mingling foes should boast and bleed!
Where bright-beaming summers exalt the perfume;
Where demi-gods appeared, as records tell.
When I think on the lightsome days
Are worthy of the mountains from whose blocks
The treachery punished as it ought to be.
Wait here, my child, with patience; kneel in prayer
His eyes went after them, until they got
With Nature's realms of worship, earth and air--
And o'er the Lowlands I hae been;
Green lanes that shut out burning skies
This uneradicable taint of Sin,
How daddie Burke the plea was cookin',
Seal'd up with frugal care in massive waxen piles,
O how can I be blythe and glad,
For that to love, so long, I've dormant lain:
The humbler ranks of human-kind,
Again in folly's path might go astray;
Delusions, oppressions, and murderous wars:
They shoulder'd on towards that brightening cast.
Then all averr'd, I had kill'd the Bird
Mid the wild wind's lulling sound.
Their faces blythe, fu' sweetly kythe,
Make pleasing music, and not wild uproar.
Was best, could I but shun the spot where man might come.
More blest the life of godly Eremite,
Are ye like those within the human breast?
With after times.--The patriot shall feel
Hale strength, nor from my bones all marrow drain'd.
Or in the glens and rocky caves
By heedless chance I turn'd mine eyes,
They could not, sure, beneath the same roof sleep
Of the forest's whispering fleeces,
Ev'n godly meetings o' the saunts,
By their contagion; Conquerors and Kings,
There, too, the Goddess loves in stone, and fills
Life's weary vale I'll wander thro';
That stays one moment in an open flower,
Scattered the clouds away--and on that name attend
Saturn is fallen, am I too to fall?
Dispeopled worlds with war's alarms
But when she hears what you have done,
As if he wished himself to hide:
But still the mair I'm that way bent,
Unwearied ear of the whole universe
Daisies and buttercups and ladysmocks
His soul shall taste the sadness of her might,
Of their petty ocean. Oftener, heavily,
What Whig but melts for good Sir James!
environment; it would be more unjust not to represent this phase of
This sweetest specimen of rural flowers
And to her auld husband he's carried her back:
And bleb the withering hay with pearly gems,
Thy trees take root in Love; the snows above,
Kilmarnock lang may grunt an' grane,
I'm giddy at that cheek so fair and smooth;
And perish'd mony a bonnie boat,
Fond of a land which gave them nought but life,
Or what does he regard his single woes?
To whom the boundless air alone were home:
The robin sings his song by the dairy O!
A glittering star or two--till many trace
With immortality, who fears to follow
On Corsincon I'll glow'r and spell,
What tho', like commoners of air,
An' Scotland drew her pipe, an' blew,
Think you he nought but prison walls did see,
That brilliant gift shall so enrich me,
O sweetly, soundly, weel may he sleep
When I've leisure will make it stand more weathers still.
To sum up all, be merry, I advise;
And full of silver moons, that, as she breathed,
Far as the rude barbarian marks the bound.
And shew his little eye's anatomy.
His Druid locks to shake and ooze with sweat,
Not to thee, but thanks to nature,
Thick mists, obscure, involve me round;
On all thou'st seen, and heard, and wrought;
Fareweel the Braes o' Ballochmyle!
Auld, grim, black-bearded Geordie's sel',
It is na, Jean, thy bonnie face,
So, took a birth afore the mast,
So I neer dreamed from this, what soon befell,
And flaps her grey wings in the doubling light;
Art thou most lovely? When gone far astray
And searching sunbeams warm and sultry creep,
The bonniest lad that e'er I saw,
The powers aboon will tent thee;
But then, wi' you, he'll be sae taught,
I dropt my schemes, like idle dreams,
The goal of consciousness? Ah, 'tis the thought,
He danc'd wi' Jeanie on the down;
Thou beauteous wreath, with melancholy eyes,
His voice was like the voice of three.
Oer crowds of pastoral scenes recordless here.
But hush! hark! a deep sound strikes like a rising knell!
Than the shell, from the bright golden sands of the ocean
The moss-lain Dryads shall be lull'd to sleep;
Pointed its beak over the fringed bank;
Thou that of a' things Maker art,
That is the thing you ne'er shall see;
By scoundrels, even wi' holy robes,
Where the wild thyme blossoms fair.
And, bent on winning borough towns,
Then, swith! an' get a wife to hug,
She seem'd a splendid angel, newly drest,
Soon the assembly, in a circle rang'd,
They get all still and lie in safety sure
And her first footsteps touch'd a verdant hill;
Kindled he was, and blasted; for to be
Thou first of our orators, first of our wits;
An' naething, now, to big a new ane,
Those who weep not for Kings shall weep for thee,
I've left my own old home of homes,
It's guid to be honest and true,
To every fiddling, rhyming billie,
Do I behold these steep and lofty cliffs,
Our piety to Neptunus supreme!"--
Slowly he falls, amidst triumphant cries,
Her eye-brows thin and jet, and hollow eyes.
The cardin' o't, the spinnin' o't,
To feel no other breezes than are blown
Days happy as the gold coin could invent
But thought I might hae waur offers.
When first I came to Stewart Kyle,
And so remain, because thou listenest:
Behind the throne then Grenville's gone,
Just as I've marked them scores of times before,
Brimming the water-lily cups with tears
And runs about till drabbled to the knees.
Their pleasures in a long immortal dream.
Dulcet-eyed as Ceres' daughter,
Stare at the grandeur of the balancing?
How chang'd thou art! how pallid, chill, and drear!
And blood she bore o'er subject Earth and Sea;
Like sunbeams in a cloudlet nested
And then! his words were not a few,
They trembled to each other.--Helicon!
And in the bitterest day that ever blew
By crows, who with the kernels flew;
To where the hurrying freshnesses aye preach
And view, deep-bending in the pool,
Would pass the very hardest gazer's wish,
But wha can think so o' Tam Glen?
O'er many a heath, through many a woodland dun,
Poking hens, that lose their way,
Alas! when passion is both meek and wild!
And the horses let loose polished up the short grass
Could I with thee a message send.
Here the red Cross, for still the Cross is here,
And mony bade the world guid-night;
Ye geck at me because I'm poor,
And doubly sweet a brotherhood in song;
What loud uproar bursts from that door!
How few shall escape from the Muscovite ranks!
How long and dreary is the night
According as their souls were formed to sink or climb.
How little of life's scanty span may remain!
Were fortune lovely Peggy's foe,
Thy Saint-adorers count the Rosary:
We bless thee, God of Nature wide,
Crept gradual, from the feet unto the crown,
Or disappointed passion lurked below:
That he might gaze and worship all unseen;
I wad nae gie a button for her.
Fairest flower, behold the lily,
The Heaven itself, is blinded throughout night.
And jinkin' hares, in amorous whids
Moore's Almanack where wonders never cease--
An' even their sports, their balls an' races,
Tread on each other's kibes.  A long adieu
Looks down wi' sneering, scornfu' view
That thoughts of thee and thine on polished breasts bestow.
Remoter females, famed for sickening prate;
And to that motion tune his wanton song,
And stagnate and corrupt; till changed to poison,
No more will I count over, link by link,
Of yellowish hue, yet beautifully green;
And up I started: Ah! my sighs, my tears,
Amang the brackens on the brae,
Are sighing "going! all a-going!"
And sure in language strange she said
Beneath the oak which breaks away the wind,
While birds rejoice in leafy bowers;
And bid us listen! And I deem it wise
I've aften wonder'd, honest Luath,
But silk and satins rich and rare
"I have no friends," said Lamia, "no, not one;
How I so found it full of pleasing charms?
So think they, while they listen to its song,
Tho' whiles ye moistify your leather,
But first 'tis fit to tell how she could muse
Ne horrid crags, nor mountains dark and tall,
If thou wilt, as thou swearest, grant my boon!"
There, swankies young, in braw braid-claith,
The Artist and his Ape, to teach and tell
Ye pow'rs wha mak mankind your care,
Are ugly clubs, the Poets Polyphemes
When first her bonnie face I saw;
The Giaour from Othman's race again may wrest;
And this thing woe crept in among our hearts,
Now fare ye weel, an' joy be wi' you,
Rome and her Ruin past Redemption's skill--
He has nae thought but how to kill
Behold that eye which shot immortal hate,
Whose spleen e'en worse than Burns' venom when
And listen'd to her breathing, if it chanced
Why need I sigh far hills to see
At length the stir of rural labour's still,
Comes from beyond the river to my bed:
Like scrapin' out auld Crummie's nicks,
Is an eternal April to the ground,
From dewy sward or thorny spray
Where falling stars dart their artillery forth,
And reekin' red ran mony a sheugh.
The billie is gettin' his questions,
All smeared with candle snuff and bacon grease.
And never knew, till then, the weight of Despot's chains.
Against thy rifted trunk, what steps hath gone?
Were full of pestilent light; our taintless rills
And list'ning to their witching voice
With gaping wonderment had stared aghast;
Accept this tribute from the bard
Like the hid scent in an unbudded rose?
In Dian's face they read the gentle lore:
A storm came on, and I could see
Upon the house-top, glittering bright,
Her ready eggs, before I'll kissing snatch
Yet nature's charms, the hills and woods,
With burthens more than I could bear;
In uproar and riot rejoice the night long;
And Betty, now at Susan's side,
For civilly swearing and quaffing;
I to the muses have been bound,
Those who find contemplation in the urn,
For Earth's destruction thou dost all despise,
No man e'er panted for a mortal love.
Tho' you, with days and honours crown'd,
An' owre the threshold ventures;
And thro' disastrous night they darkling grope,
And murmur about Indian streams?"--Then she,
At first it seem'd a little speck
That should their days, surviving perils past,
With sudden stir the startled forest sings
In vain auld age his body batters;
The sway of human hand; gold vase emboss'd
And kissin' my Katie when a' was done.
Thou must hold water in a witch's sieve,
Braw, braw lads of Galla Water;
None; but _the moral's truth_ tells simpler so.--
Outblackens Erebus, and the full-cavern'd earth
The pennie's the jewel that beautifies a'.
Trips it before Apollo than the rest.
And in kirk-yards renew their leagues
Let curious eyes to search a long way in,
To which the leaders sped; but not half raught
Philosophy, no idle pedant dream,
Of haggard seeming, but a boon indeed:
A handsome grave does hide her;
That something in us never dies:
And aye eneugh, o' needfu' clink.
(Hey, and the rue grows bonnie wi' thyme),
O ye whose cheek the tear of pity stains,
It is not so--I see them full and plain--
She pushed her bonnet up and smiled,
Marking the place, and bringing up with tears
Guarding his forehead, with her round elbow,
There, try his mettle on the creed,
Shut from the busy world of more incredulous.
May Boreas never thresh your rigs,
Come, let a proper text be read,
Wi' mony a sweet babe fatherless,
In water, fiery realm, and airy bourne;
Glides thro' the pathways; she knows all their notes,
Like a strong giant, and my spirit teaze
I pray'd and turn'd my head away
When falls the Coliseum, Rome shall fall;
That on the wind with pleasing hum rebounds
From the hay-cock's moistened heaps,
Back to the joyous Alps, who call to her aloud!
Lo! it is sacred to a solemn Feast:
With deep-struck, reverential awe,
The weary pund, the weary pund,
His wing on ground and makes a huzzing noise,
All hail thy palaces and tow'rs,
And, agonizing, curse the time and place
An' Caledon threw by the drone,
His breast was armed 'gainst fate, his wants were few
Yet while the busy means are ply'd,
My head was turn'd perforce away
And oft on Sundays young men's gifts declined,
To charms as fair as those that soothed his happier day.
Though thus in arms they emulate her sons,
While, raving mad, I wish a heckle
Or catch'd wi' warlocks in the mirk,
All through the teeming year: so thou wilt shine
On heaven's pavement; brotherly he talks
Must thou alone in guilt immortal swell,
Next Cottus: prone he lay, chin uppermost,
Between two hills. All hail delightful hopes!
And then the forest told it in a dream
I send the lilies given to me--
As Proserpine still weeps for her Sicilian air.
Some days of joyaunce are decreed to all,
So may the auld year gang out moaning
She-wolf! whose brazen-imaged dugs impart
Which make the milk so sweet, bonny Mary O!
Grew, like a lusty flower in June's caress.
Of Robin and moonlight and flowers.
And Virtues which are merciful, nor weave
Though long before thy hand they touch,
Come forth her work of gladness to contrive,
I, who, for very sport of heart, would race
Her ringlets round her fingers, saying: "Youth!
I tun'd my pipe and pleas'd myself
He roosed my een, sae bonnie blue,
Of Moor and Knight, in mailéd splendour drest:
Well to that heart might his these absent greetings pour!
O latest born and loveliest vision far
No drop of that clear stream its way shall miss
I must stand the winter shocks,
In bleak Thermopylæ's sepulchral strait--
And russet commoner who knows the face
Made answer, like a traveller bold,
And ne'er--at least like me--awake!
They'll live or die wi' fame, Willie!
Catch the white-handed nymphs in shady places,
I'll laugh, that's poz--nay more, the world shall know it;
Ere the cold Stranger passed to other climes:
That I will follow with due reverence,
Her charms had struck a sturdy caird,
I sue not for my lone, my widow'd wife;
What is the worst of woes that wait on Age?
When youthfu' May its bloom renewed.
No more the thickening brakes and verdant plains
And surely ye'll be your pint-stowp,
Fine was the mitigated fury, like
She stands with eager haste at slander's tale,
Up flies the bouncing woodcock from the brig
Up-followed by a multitude that rear'd
The heroes of the present and the past
So long as he'd credit, he'd pitcher them both.
The red-breast whistles from a garden-croft;
Altho' I say't, he's gleg enough,
Just as the Spring-wind drives a feather.
Is the spot marked with no colossal bust?
If sorrow and anguish their exit await,
Turn, damsels! hist! one word I have to say.
Both with his head, and with his hand,
The bonnie lark, companion meet!
And, little town, thy streets for evermore
Cast off the wat, put on the dry,
Thou, winter, hurling thro' the air
Let the red wine within the goblet boil,
In dreams deny me not to see thee here!
And near the thorn, aboon the well,
Sobb'd Clymene among her tangled hair.
Than quite refuse our law, man.
For Donald was the brawest lad,
Not that Philosophy on such a mind
Will make Elysian shades not too fair, too divine.
Mid wounds, and clinging darts, and lances brast,
But cheerful still, I am as well,
Their feet, that crushed down freedom to its grave
Shall e'er prevail against us, or disturb
By one mark'd out to be a Noble's bride.
To pour her sorrows o'er her poet's dust.
Roars of a million tongues, and none knows what they mean.
An' ay she win't, an' ay she swat,
Ah! grievance sore, and listless dull delay,
And the bay was white with silent light,
Bewildered shepherds to their path again;
That of its charms divests the dewy lawn,
Though portal columns of a giant size,
Mid-way between our homes:--your accents bland
Of shapes and sounds and shifting elements
Red gleamed the Cross, and waned the Crescent pale,
The gazer's eye with philosophic mirth,
There is sad feud among ye, and rebellion
One moment of the mightiest, and again
Here's to all the wandering train!
To save them from the wrath of Gaul's unsparing lord.
Beside their moss-grown hut of clay,
No sparkling rivulet spread the verdant herb;
When no fair dreams before my "mind's eye" flit,
Art thou wayworn, or canst not further trace
Living in shattered guise; and still, and cold,
"King of the butterflies; but by this gloom,
Patron or Tyrant, as the changing mood
Thy gentle hand to clasp in mine!
More horrid still. Above a sombre cliff
Little in common; untaught to submit
Wrung overwhelming eloquence, first drew
Glaring the angry witch. O Dis, even now,
He'd whetted his knife upon pendil and hone
He thinks it Greek or Latin which he hears,
Husband, husband, cease your strife,
Yet here to crazy age we're brought,
Here stoops an ash-tree--hark! the wind gets high,
Farewell! with _him_ alone may rest the pain,
The fall of waters! rapid as the light
If ye'll meddle nae mair wi' the matter,
Guard thine immortal cubs, nor thy fond charge forget?
Slabbering at mouth and with a staggering stoop
While thro' your pores the dews distil
Polish their grin, nay, sigh for ladies' love.
And still, perhaps, with faithless gleam,
But English gold has been our bane--
I have a triple soul! O fond pretence--
Where water-lilies spread their oily leaves,
As their own beams; and earth, and earth-born jars,
But it is so; and I am smother'd up,
But prudence is her o'erword ay,
O haud your tongue, my father dear,
Such is the tempest has shaken my bosom,
Unless he wad from that time forth
Farewell! and ne'er such sorrows tear
Which filled his heart with glee.
Dusk for our loves, yet light enough to grace
Yet fare thee well--upon Soracte's ridge we part.
The path of love and poesy. But rest,
God reigns on earth, in air and sky.
And last, pointing to Corinth, ask'd her sweet,
So perish all in turn, save well-recorded _Worth_:
Power may make many earthly gods,
Who must to her his dear friend's secret tell;
If thou wast playing on my shady brink,
With many else which I have never known.
Never fear for your legs if they're broken to-day;
The wealthiest Roman's wife: Behold his love or pride!
They tune their hearts, by far the noblest aim:
An' float the jinglin icy-boord,
To Phœbus' shrine; and in it he did fling
No, there are throned seats unscalable
Yet let us ponder boldly--'tis a base
Round Peace, the tenderest flower of Spring;
And hands which offer early flowers,
Since I have walk'd with you through shady lanes
Gae back the gate ye cam again,
That he could saw hemp-seed a peck;
And now the third part of the string,
But for thy people's sake destroy 'em,
Groves, meadows, melodies, and arbour roses;
A venerable Chief advanc'd in years;
Who wilt not be, nor have a slave;
The rushes whistle, sedges rustle,
And I can tell that bounteous Heaven
And the old hare half wounded buzzes bye.
'Gainst headlong, ruthless, mad Rebellion's arms.
O, fresh is the rose in the gay, dewy morning,
Eager blundering from the plough,
While strife neer pauses at so mean a door.
My life is but the life of winds and tides,
In the street--for removal too powerful and large
Soon, as it seem'd, we left our journeying high,
But the bonnie lass he lo'ed sae dear.
Inconstant, childish, proud, and full of fancies;
Went wondering where the honey sweets could be;
And twilight saints, and dim emblazonings,
When butterflies are on the wing,
For truth's sake, what woe afterwards befel,
In them a refuge from the worldly shocks,
Till the fond, fixed eyes, forget they stare.
Come boat me o'er, come row me o'er,
And sportsmen wander by yon grave,
"Whoe'er shall provoke thee, th' encounter shall rue!"
The old cock'd hat, the gray surtout, the same;
What I know not: but who, of men, can tell
And joyful in a mother's gentlest cares,
A fierce and dreadful hunter he!
Till block an' studdie ring an' reel
While thou art pouring forth thy soul abroad
Do these newsmongers traffic with the news.
Or, sitting by the fire, in fancy soar
Of those whose eyes are only turned below,
When last I saw thy young blue eyes they smiled,
So how this mighty plea may end
But to our tale:--Ae market night,
Destruction cowers, to mark what deeds are done;
And heaven-born piety her sanction seals.
Are cloudy phantasms. Caverns lone, farewel!
A gift that e'en for Syme were fit.
Let William Hyslop give the spirit.
With girt and stirrup fiddle-faddle;
Adorner of the ruin --Comforter
The great, the wealthy, fear thy blow,
Welcome, ye deserts, and ye caves!
"And why sits she beside the thorn
First exiles, then replaces what we hate;
With heavy thump, a lifeless lump
She promis'd fair, and perform'd but ill;
I'm fley'd it make me eerie, Sir.
How languid the scenes, late so sprightly, appear!
Then will I pass the countries that I see
By oppression's woes and pains!
Some precious book from out its snug retreat,
"As sure as there's a moon in heaven."
We own they're prudent, but who feels they're good?
There must be surely character'd strange things,
I'm tauld he offers very fairly.
And when she looked "what could I ail?"
And the shepherd tents his flock as he pipes on his reed.
Glassed, with its dancing light, the sunny ray;
When proof was sought, made no reply.
And peers among the cloudlet's jet and white,
Born with her birth:--No--he shall not expire
And you, my friends! farewell, a short farewell!
An unseen Seraph, we believe in thee,--
The poacher shoots and hurries from the cry,
For Peebles, frae the water-fit,
Away she posts up hill and down,
Ae thought frae her shall ne'er depart,
Said, toss down the whistle, the prize of the field,
First Freedom, and then Glory--when that fails,
Who will not sing, "God save the King,"
With her own favoured melodies of love.
An' ran them till they a' did wauble,
And heaven looked downward on the mind,
The rich, the poor, one common bed
Our spirit's wings: despondency besets
For days and weeks it play'd us freaks--
Whare Burns has wrote in rhyming blether
Is, that I have my inner self abused,
His tongue with the full weight of utterless thought,
In all the clam'rous cry of starving want,
And so unsullied was the marble hue,
Except the moment that they crush't him;
Stretching across a void, then guiding o'er
In spikes, in branches, and in stars,
Firm as a fortress, with its fence of stone,
Gave mighty pulses: in this tottering case
Here's freedom to him that wad write!
But, if it's ordain'd I maun take him,
Fair Pastorella in the bandit's den,
The deil, or else an outler quey,
But ne'er can make it farther, O;
Or as the winged cap of Mercury.
Reflected in the gurgling rill:
Sunshine days of joy and pleasure;
Haply, like dolphin tumults, when sweet shells
Till now, o'er all my wide domains
Into the living sea of waking dreams,
Oh dearest, dearest boy! my heart
What time the sky-lark shakes the tremulous dew
Why does your tender palm dissolve in dew?"--
Deaf to the nightingale's first under-song;
Now am I of breath, speech, and speed possest,
A head for thought profound and clear, unmatch'd:
The butterflies are tossed about
The threat'ning storm some, strongly, rein;
With every friend and fellow-woodlander--
And scales upon the beauty of its wings.
To me no pleasure Beauty brings;
And virtue's light, that beams beyond the spheres;
And innocently open their glad wings,
That, if no joy, no sorrow lurked behind;
The hallow'd hour was near at hand: she sighs
Then thou hadst slept for ever.
Redeemer of dark centuries of shame--
We met, kissed, and parted agen.
Nor what soft incense hangs upon the boughs,
Aye, sleep; for when our love-sick queen did weep
Here didst thou dwell, in this enchanted cover,
Be tender of your strings, ye soothing lutes;
Draw from my heart the pain away.
Hers are the willing chains o' love,
Was I in no wise startled. So recline
The badger turns and drives them all away.
Which stir too strongly the soul's secret springs,
Not in your heart while care weighs on your brow:
Demure with porringer and plate
Here morning in the ploughman's songs is met
A fellowship with essence; till we shine,
Now colic grips, an' barkin' hoast,
In noisome alley, and in pathless wood:
Toads with their poison, doctors with their drug,
And as wi' thee I'd wish to live,
Then let the sudden bursting sigh
--This woman dwelt in Dorsetshire,
An' there will be lads o' the gospel,
Many a Nightingale perch giddily
And call each coxcomb to the wordy war.
Winter and spring, toil ceasing ere tis dark,
Who fattens best where sorrow worst appears
Her smile was like a simmer morn;
For I have cherished them as dear,
Erewhile thy breast sae warming
He was her laureate monie a year,
Of fondest beauty; fonder, in fair sooth,
Sae fair her hair, sae brent her brow,
Each summer time to life. Lo! this is he,
And Isabella on its music hung:
And with the food of pride sustained his soul
Their colours and their forms, were then to me
E'en then, elate, my spirit leaps, and prances,
And thus: "I need not any hearing tire
Yet aft a ragged cowte's been known
Cuts like a scythe, while through the clouds
What deeds of prowess unrecorded died!
With soul resolv'd, with soul resign'd;
So, their worships of the Faculty,
Pronounce who can: for all that Learning reaped
And pillows on the thorn my rack'd repose!
By a lone wall a lonelier column rears
For the lone Chieftain, who majestic stalks,
Till by the voice of him and his compeers,
The moon was sinking in the west
This while my notion's ta'en a sklent,
Must think on what will be, and what has been.
Sat Legislation's sov'reign pow'rs!
That am not yet a glorious denizen
That Architecture's noble art is lost!
The owlet in the moonlight air,
Fair Isabel, poor simple Isabel!
Your ruin'd formless bulk o' stane en' lime,
And vow'd I was his dear lassie, dear lassie,
The old pond with its water weed
Ambition's life and labours all were vain--
When, lo! on either hand the list'ning Bard,
Breath of new buds unfolding? From the meaning
Till hunted Dobbin and the rest are found;
That lean against a streamlet's rushy banks,
And, oh! that hour and broomy bower,
But Lord Gregory then was fast asleep,
All unbought champions in no princely cause
They were the first his smiles to woo.
Crowning the summit of the verdant mound;
For thou wast once a flowret blooming wild,
All the Sons of the mountains arise at the note,
In the long vista of the years to roll,
Their gilded collars glittering in the sun;
Its spray that the wild flower kindly bedews.
And tread the dreary path to that dark world unknown.
Then rose a mansion proud our woods among,
Uplift thee; nor for very shame can own
And from the rafters upon strings depend
Nor minds he the white swans that dream so sweetly:
'Mid contradictions her delights to lend.
My love she wears a cotton plaid,
Dear to a heart where nought was left so dear!
There shall they rot--Ambition's honoured fools!
Turned mist--the sun, a homeless ranger,
In wakeful ears, like uproar past and gone--
And what shall a poor maiden do?
"I touch'd no lute, I sang not, trod no measures:
Innumerable mountains rise, and rise,
Ayr, gurgling, kiss'd his pebbled shore,
To equal young Jessie you seek it in vain;
And shed oer meadows far their sweet perfume.
Thou strings the nerves o' Labour sair,
An' stumpan on his ploughman shanks,
They will be found softer than ring-dove's cooings.
A lovely tale of human life we'll read.
Melodious howsoever, can confound
To breed distrust and hate, that make the soft voice hiss.
May wind their path of blood along the West;
Since dark in death's fish-creel we wail
Were glowing to receive a thousand guests:
That keeps us from our homes ethereal;
And laugh at a' the pangs I dree;
Remember'd it from childhood all complete
Which stretched his father on a bloody bier,
May for a moment soothe, it cannot slake
Where not the voice of man our pleasure mars,
Thou wast to lose fair Syrinx--do thou now,
A faithful brother I have left,
Why did I live to see that day?
To milk her cows on Cowslip Hill
The larks that in the thistle shield,
Your honours' hearts wi' grief 'twad pierce,
Wi' sowps o' kail and brats o' claise,
I have been half in love with easeful Death,
As keepsakes and pledges all to never fade away;
And then his auld brass will buy me a new pan.
He with his wand light touch'd, and heavenward
Have no self-passion or identity.
Or lonely Contemplation thus might stray;
Gin ye'll leave your Collier Laddie.
As if to glean the ruddy tears, it tried,
When ye begat the base, degen'rate race!
Friend of my life, true patron of my rhymes!
Display a world's epitome of names.
"An honest man's the noblest work of GOD;"
Of light, soft, unseen leaves of sounds divine.
Great Nature's Nile, whose deep stream rises higher
Hark! hark! the thick black cloud is cleft,
An' unco pack an' thick thegither;
For him that's gone and far away.
"Peona! ever have I long'd to slake
This mony a year I've stood the flood an' tide;
Just when the sufferer begins to burn,
My love she's but a lassie yet,
Ye howling winds, and wintry swelling waves!
The gallant Sir Robert fought hard to the end;
Thou orb of day! thou other paler light!
So done, upon the nymph his eyes he bent
Or Zipporah,  the scauldin' jad,
But why should ae man better fare,
Still rising by the plummet's law,
And aye she wrought her mammie's wark,
I saw the battle, sair and tough,
For one has cut my dearest tie,
Listen, O listen, thou Wedding-guest!
On thy sweet brow is sorrow ploughed by shame,
When ye pilfer'd the alms o' the poor;
Will die a death too lone and incomplete,
And ye may tell my kith and kin,
Stop and consider! life is but a day;
And pour to death along some hungry sands."--
As often as I think of those dear times
How to make Madness beautiful, and cast
And pledging with contented smack
And while at church he often shakes his head
The loves, the ways of simple swains,
Wha are to blame for this mischief,
Glad as that sunshine and the laughing sky.
Whilome in Albion's isle there dwelt a youth,
That was before we knew the winged thing,
With slop-frock suiting to the ploughman's taste,
These movin' things ca'd wives and weans
Thou art sweet as the smile when fond lovers meet,
'Twas on a Grecian autumn's gentle eve
And may you better reck the rede
Heav'n sent me ane mae than I wanted.
Some wept, some wail'd, all bow'd with reverence;
Holding his forehead, to keep off the burr
"These fears can never be endured,
Comes bleating to him, owre the knowe,
And still there's something in the world
To take the rich-ored driftings of the flood.
The rosy dawn, the springing grass,
That's prest wi' grief an' care;
Only to number out a villain's years!
From every nook the smile of plenty calls,
And still she governs with the mildest sway:
Before I leave Scotia's strand.
Which he with eager guess began to read
Their clay creator the vain title take
In deep despair by frightful wishes stirr'd,
Full many a dreary hour have I past,
The night's baith mirk and rainy, O;
Save love's willing fetters, the chains o' his Jean.
The first of my loves was a swaggering blade,
With bung-holes bored by squirrels well,
Out spak a dame in wrinkled eild--
To thy high requiem become a sod.
Through the barn-hole pops the owl;
Turn to some level plain where haughty Mars
With a warm heart, and eye prepared to scan
He is no more--these breathings are his last--
A disguis'd demon, missioned to knit
Yet vilest reptiles in their begging prose.
Old Time and Nature their changes tell,
To skelp an' scaud poor dogs like me,
But alack I never dreamed that the world had other toys
An' there the pint-stowp clatters;
And open face of heaven,--to breathe a prayer
With all his sorrowing? He sees her not.
So thickly the leafy armies gather round;
Towards him a large eagle, 'twixt whose wings,
Ye chief, to you my tale I tell,
Out of the amorous dark what day doth borrow.
From side to side, beneath the glittering morn,
Where beauty ran to shun a shower
A' ye wha live and never think,
"Who, who from Dian's feast would be away?
But, bursting into tears, wins back his way,
Breathed from the birth of Time: the veil they rent,
Share the rude mirth that thy own heart beguiles:
"O tender spouse of gold Hyperion,
And none are left to please when none are left to love.
The babe upon its mother's breast,
Pan's holy priest for young Endymion calls;
Happier Ravenna! on thy hoary shore,
And doubling over head their little fists
Melt my Dedalian wings, and drive me down
Brow-beating her fair form, and troubling her sweet pride.
Though thousands fall to deck some single name.
I know that thou wilt love me--though to drain
Of the deep rivers, and the lonely streams,
Twould soften hearts if they were hard as stone
Was ripening in itself. The ripe hour came,
While dying raptures in her arms
Walk'd dizzily away. Pained and hot
And bid him throw his kiby heels away.
I miss the hazel's happy green,
His meddling vanity, a busy fiend,
Colonna's cliff,  and gleams along the wave;
His mourners were two hosts, his friends and foes;
To think how we stood groanin', shakin',
My sonsie smirking dear-bought Bess,
But grovelling on the earth the carol ends.
Where turnkeys make the jealous portal fast,
That in such gaps as Desolation worked,
Now if she's lost my heart must break--
Yet feels self-satisfaction in his woes
A single feather of the driving storm;
In what a pickle thou hast left us!
Young Peggy blooms our bonniest lass,
Till thou hadst cool'd their cheeks deliciously:
Of river sides, and woods, and heathy waste,
Are such the flowers she brings?
Awa wi' your belles and your beauties,
The ploughman he talked of his skill as divine,
To kill Lorenzo, and there bury him.
Forbid it, ev'ry heavenly power,
And heard thee as the careless wind?
'Tis sweeter for thee despairing,
And doubly curse the luckless rhyming trade?
When England knew thee thou wert passing fair;
When strife's at height will interpose;
Ev'n silly woman has her warlike arts,
And pardon that thy secrets should be sung
The Earth itself, where thou hadst rest, would surely smile to see
And, as for him some gift she was devising,
I love the fitful gust that shakes
Untie these bands from off my hands,
That bids the heart be happy and rejoice.
What cant assumes, what hypocrites will dare,
The priest-like Father reads the sacred page,
Thy strong right hand, Lord, mak it bare
With universal tinge of sober gold,
A long half-mile she could descry him;
While, on the other hand, meek Dian's crest
When nations, tongues, and worlds must sink beneath the stroke!
And scarcely stays to ope the folding doors:
Whose very dogs would execrations howl
That distant years may boast of other Blairs!"--
And dogs begin to wag their tails;
Was driving to the tither warl'
Why is the bard unpitied by the world,
Yet lovely in your strength, as is the light
But till we meet and weet our whistle,
Foiled by a woman's hand, before a battered wall?
But faith! I muckle doubt, my sire,
With willow switch and halter by his side
The earnest trumpet spake, and silver thrills
This trespass of old Goody Blake,
For as in theatres of crowded men
The oval mirror of thy glassy lake;
They gang as saucy by poor folk,
The lover's endless minutes slowly pass'd;
Childe Harold passed o'er many a mount sublime,
And O dear what will become of me?
Where ignorance her darkening vapour throws,
O, had the malt thy strength of mind,
All suddenly, with joyful cries, there sped
To Cassillis' banks when e'ening fa's,
The nice yellow guineas for me.
Or, on the wavy grass outstretch'd supinely,
His right are these hills, and his right are these valleys,
The lad, for twa guid gimmer-pets,
Thy dictatorial wreath--couldst thou divine
For shade to shade will come too drowsily,
Now gawkies, tawpies, gowks, and fools,
And their free thoughts be crimes, and Earth have too much light.
Thickly they grow and neath the leaves are seen;
Down by the burn, where scented birks
Ah, Zephyrus! art here, and Flora too!
Or of the distance from home's pleasant lair:
Smothering their notice, by a wished disguise
That sullen ferment, which for wondrous ends
High on a mountain's highest ridge,
To shame the Doctrine of the Sadducee
And when the whirlwind's on the hill,
Against the enchased crocodile, or leaps
If e'er Detraction shore to smit you,
Ah, cruel Time, to undeceive us.
The mind hath made thee, as it peopled Heaven,
At grammar, logic, an' sic talents,
Monie a laugh, and monie a drink,
To frustrate each endeavour, O:
I should just like to storm your old tower for a spree;
Tho' ye had a' the sun shines on,
Upon the mountain did they feed;
Sir! 'twas a precious flock to me,
Than when I wander'd from the poppy hill:
And there the plough lay--people hardly could pass
They spoke as chords do from the string
When a' the lave gae to their bed,
"And as I sat, over the light blue hills
There Simmer first unfauld her robes,
No, no, too eagerly my soul deceives
Far lovelier, and his heart could not sustain
They'll keep their stubborn Highland spirit;
And cocks [her] coppled crown and runs along.
Who on Helvellyn's summit, wide awake,
That trouth, my head is grown right dizzie,
The ploughman ran but none could go so fast;
"There's not a single soul abroad."
Nor mark a patch of sky--blindfold they trace,
And the cobbler declared, was his skill but once seen,
No matter--wrong was right and right was wrong,
And the dull twanging bowstring, and the raft
In nature there is nothing melancholy.
The kind, auld, canty carlin greet,
To blame poor Matthew dare, man,
I make the whole house out of humour,
'Tis perhaps as well that it should be to borrow
God bless them a' wi' grace and gear!
Adown winding Nith I did wander,
Which even the Rights of Kings in low prostration
So said, his erewhile timid lips grew bold,
"O Isabella, I can half perceive
O' decent, honest, fawsont folk,
Here all were noble, save Nobility;
The moon-beam dwells at dewy e'en;
As if thro' a dungeon grate he peer'd
Nor the wild plunging of the tortured horse;
Their lives were nothing but a sunny shower,
And bids him thank the Bard for Freedom and his strains.
Few men o' sense will doubt your claims
Now saw the light and made it terrible.
And so she ever fed it with thin tears,
As caulder kirk, and in't but few;
For it's jet, jet black, an' it's like a hawk,
The Delhi with his cap of terror on,
Over the vanish'd bliss. Ah! what is it sings
And ev'ry ither pair that's done,
Their titles a' are empty show;
Or modest merit's silent claim;
On visionary views would fancy feed,
Upon the verge of distance lies
and mother she has nothing but her tears
And filling it once more with human soul?
Where is that soul of freedom fled?
Wi' usquebae an' blankets warm--
Still blackens and grows on his view.
Was made lang syne--Lord know how lang.
Dragging their loads of bent-stalks slavishly:
From these dire scenes my wretched lines I date,
Snatching sweet scraps of song.
Nor e'er did Delphi, when her Priestess sung
That he will seize on trickling honey-combs:
Ae fond kiss, and then we sever;
And then I married, and was rich
Yet sune thou shalt be thrown aside
And meikle thinks my luve o' my kin;
Gently commingling, gives tremendous birth
Cry the book is wi' heresy cramm'd;
The groaning trencher there ye fill,
It seasoned comfort to our hearts' desire,
Or take the saddle from his back;
The cottage leaves the palace far behind;
And when the evening rack was reared
Wha bring thy elders to disgrace
I thought the worst was simple misery;
For with wide eye he wonders, and smiles oft.
Once the lov'd haunts of Scotia's royal train;
My heart's in the Highlands, my heart is not here,
Has made our hills and valleys gay;
And, for my sake, let this young maid abide
Thy nod can make the tempest cease to blow,
Lord Gregory to his mother called:
And fram'd her last, best work, the human mind,
With a sweet kernel; to set budding more,
Through its lone vales; and where I found a spot
Wore by degrees, 'till her last roon,
At length from me her course she steer'd,
Sluggish and dull the leaf-strewn river flows;
For man's protection. Surely the All-seeing,
Because not altogether of such clay
The hedges all have vanished from his eyes;
And mair we'se ne'er be parted.
The tale so fraught with 'ticing charms,
Is a stern task of soul:--No matter,--it is taught.
The winds becalmed around us cared for no cannon ball;
For there the Carthaginian's warlike wiles
Approach this shrine, and worship here.
That comes not to the human mourner's breast.
The German Chief to thraw, man;
Comes, 'mid a string of coxcombs to display
An' rowth o' rhyme to rave at will,
That balances the heavy meteor-stone;--
In the hot throng, where we become the spoil
An' there will be Cardoness,  Esquire,
She gaz'd into the fresh-thrown mould, as though
Whose arms of love would grasp the human race:
'Twas there I got them, from the gaps and slits
O'er the swelling drumlie wave.
That I for joy hae barkit wi' them.
Wha thinks to knit himsel' the faster
That page is now before me, and on mine
Who, noteless, steals the crowds among,
And ae bonnie lassie, his darling and mine.
Writhing with pity, and a cursing fit
For him, those chambers held barbarian hordes,
Their eldest hope, their Jenny, woman grown,
A copious spring; and both together dash'd
My charming rod, my potent river spells;
She sings but to her love, nor e'er conceives
I cannot say, 'O wherefore sleepest thou?'
Wad threap auld folk the thing misteuk;
For thee, who thus in too protracted song
Withstand, unmoved, the lustre of her gaze,
May bear the gree, and a' that;
Autumn comes laden with her ripened load
"Shall bauld Lapraik, the king o' hearts,
In softness as in firmness far above
Thou's welcome, wean, mischanter fa' me,
Of a thousand fountains, so that he could dash
The glutted Cyclops, what care?--Juliet leaning
A nest with cobwebs there will build, and fly
A cloak of blue wrapp'd up his aged bones,
That fell, one after one, yet all at once,
I have beheld Sophia's bright roofs swell
And this is in the Night:--Most glorious Night!
Who life and wisdom at one race begun,
The feather'd field-mates, bound by Nature's tie,
And in my arms ye'se lie and sleep,
Like women turning skreeking to a child.
And out again when every thing's secure
As master, landlord, husband, father,
She hardly can sustain her fears;
Silence was music from the holy spheres;
That breast imbued with such immortal fire?
Tho' a' my daily care thou art,
And choose each pleasure that my fancy sees;
His black matted head on his shoulder is bent,
Thou paints auld nature to the nines,
Such was the scene--what now remaineth here?
The injured Stuart line is gone,
I love thee, rude and boisterous as thou art;
When o'er the hill beat surly storms,
To take a fancied city of delight,
My spirit struck from all the beautiful!
In other ages--cold and sacred busts
Till the broad Sun withdraws his lessening ray:
He who hath loved not, here would learn that lore,
And when he's lame they only jest and play
That peck along the road, regard him not.
We could not speak no more than if
Yet I bear a heart shall support me still.--
My honoured colonel, deep I feel
She showed her taste refined and just,
These things just served to stir the torpid sense,
In lanely glens ye like to stray;
And sense, and sight of sweetness; here the Rhone
And why should passing shadows grieve us?
Almost suspended, we are laid asleep
They make us see the naked truth,
Than a' the pride that loads the tide,
Is nought to my pains frae thee, Oh!
To scud like a wild bird, and take thee off
The gentles ye wad ne'er envy 'em.
Th' Acroceraunian mountains of old name;
Deeper and deeper sinking, until drown'd
Ye woodbines, hanging bonnilie,
When Phoebus sinks behind the seas;
The holly bush, a sober lump of green,
Hae wish'd since Jock departed;
That I may worship them? No eyelids meet
But come, all ye offspring of Folly so true,
Her lord, a wight o' Homer's craft,
Is made of love and friendship, and sits high
And I must think, do all I can,
This iron in my soul in vain--shall _they_ not mourn?
When Flattery sleeps with thee, and History does thee wrong?
Saving love's self, who stands superb to share
When dreadful guests would come to spoil her solitude.
That in the act of seizing shrinks to nought.
Would hide us up, although spring leaves were none;
Prone down the rock the whitening sheet descends,
When yet a child, I heard that kisses drew
Nor kick your rickles aff their legs,
From either side their stems branch'd one to one
An' did nae less in full Congress,
Th' expectant wee-things, toddlin', stacher thro'
On the high couch he lay!--his friends came round--
How to entangle, trammel up and snare
Thy voice, thy lute, thy pipe, thy incense sweet
I cannot choose but kneel here and adore.
Minion of grandeur! think you he did wait?
That lov'st to greet the early morn,
And still my thoughts like weedlings wild
And soothe thy lips: hist, when the airy stress
How quick Time is flying, how keen Fate pursues!
Ye burnies, wimplin' down your glens,
Wi' hale breeks, saxpence, an' a bannock,
But point the rake that taks the door;
Wild strains to which, spell-bound, the nightingales listened;
Then hey for a lass wi' a tocher,
Through almond blossoms and rich cinnamon;
How was it these same ledger-men could spy
How lofty, sweet Afton! thy neighbouring hills,
Then take what gold could never buy--
A wilful murder, jury made the crime;
But why should I for others groan,
Her lips, more than the cherries bright,
Oh, sweet Fancy! let her loose;
O'erhung wi' fragrant spreading shaws,
The morning-bright Apollo! young Apollo!'
Hapless bird! a prey the surest,
The weather was cauld, and the lassie lay still,
Which rushes on the solitary shore
Of hero Sires, who shame thy now degenerate horde!
That for a blink I hae lo'ed best;
On many harps, which he has lately strung;
In the green woods, and meadows summer-shorn,
Go, shed one tear upon my heather-bloom,
Her sweet balmy lip when 'tis prest:
While joys above my mind can move,
Rise, with thy yellow waves, and mantle her distress.
Then takes his lamp, and riseth from his knees,
Say, sages, what's the charm on earth
Jane might love hers, but she forsook the plan
Will you leave your justings, your jars, and your quarrels,
Led yellow Autumn, wreath'd with nodding corn;
So pale you scarcely looked at her:
And Ettrick banks now roaring red,
Mutrie and you were just a match
Thy pencil dashing its excess of shades,
For venturing syllables that ill beseem
Voices of soft proclaim, and silver stir
Ae dreary, windy, winter night,
He talks to none but wends his silent way,
"And the Owlet whoops to the wolf below
And future ages hear his growing fame.
These brethren having found by many signs
I'll ne'er trouble them, nor thee, Oh!
On the more distant scene; how lovely 'tis
Gay villagers, upon a morn of May
For there lay the knight like a whale in the sand.
For freedom haunts the humble glen
"Susan, I'd gladly stay with you.
Who lov'st to see the hamadryads dress
Wi' people wha ken ye nae better.
As ever scoured a pail or milked a cow;
And round the table all the boys are met;
Have won for Spain her well asserted right.
Thy smiles are sae like my blythe sodger laddie,
And many a message from the skies,
Small good to one who had by Mulla's stream
Perhaps Dundee's wild-warbling measures rise,
Nor yet the crowded fleet its anchor stirred.
Fell into nothing--into stupid sleep.
Whilome upon his banks did legions throng
Their hope, their doom, their punishment, their law;
And never was a day of summer shine,
Was Hesperean; to his capable ears
Long Susan lay deep lost in thought,
And, unperceived, through key-holes creep,
Food fills the wame an' keeps us livin';
Of his delicious lady. He who died
The swallow's on the wing, bonny Mary O!
The flying Mede, his shaftless broken bow--
The wailing minstrel of despairing woe;
My happy thoughts sententious; he will teem
A sound of moan, an agony of sound,
Of a bright Sun can make sufficient holiday,
The hillock turf, and caught the latter end
Gleam delicately through the azure clear:
Yet these proud Pillars claim no passing sigh;
Battling with nations, flying from the field;
He's lost a friend and neebor dear,
Would to God I had one like a beam of the sun,
An' ye wha tent the gospel fauld,
Anticipation forward points the view.
Which round its marge reflected woven bowers,
And pillowed on the hope of heaven?
And seems from purple clouds to wing its flight.
Loud blew the cauld winter winds at our parting;
Even in Destruction's depth, her foreign foes,
Till the sense aches with gazing to behold
All objects, if compared with these? and stem
Or water but the desert! whence arise
Thou know'st that Thou hast formed me,
To mark if her dark eyes had yet discern'd
O, bless her with a mother's joys,
For there the bonnie lassie lives,
He caught her airy form, thus did he plain,
While through the thronged streets your bridal car
Has grown colossal, and can only find
Where, for some sin, to Sorrow I was cast,
While his mate sits nestling in the bush;
Here heart-struck Grief might heav'nward stretch her scan,
The birds sang love on every spray--
While o'er their heads the hazels hing,
And with sick longing all the night outwear,
Fu' sweet upon its thorny tree;
While thus in concert they this lay half sang,
Supporting roofs fantastic, stony groves;
The haunt o' Spring's the primrose brae,
Still to the last kind Vice clings to the tott'ring walls.
Must wayward Fortune's adverse hand
And yill an' whisky gie to cairds,
From his lorn voice, and past his loamed ears
She felt the warmth, her eyelids open'd bland,
Look o'er this vale of vintage-bowers;
Hunger, cauld, and a' sic harms,
Though grief and pain may come to-morrow?
Vermilion-spotted, golden, green, and blue;
His ancient mother, for some comfort yet.
Those headlong furious passions to confine;
An' wi' her loof her face a-washin';
And gart me weet my waukrife winkers,
No leaves are now upon the birch tree there:
To hear the thuds, and see the cluds,
Hast thou a sword that thine enemy's smart is?
It had been strange, even in a dream
Till Triton blew his horn. The palace rang;
Beneath the moon that shines so bright,
Such an attempt required an inspiration
The thunder-clouds close o'er it, which when rent
The shady visions come to domineer,
A gude blue bonnet on his head--
Or e'er in new Utopias were ared,
I came among these hills; when like a roe
Of ambitious magic: every ocean-form
The Avalanche--the thunderbolt of snow!
I trust, meantime, my boon is in thy gift:
Past the sweet Virgin's picture, while his prayer he saith.
I'll boldly pronounce they are none, Sir.
But with its sound it shook the sails
But left behind him heroes bright,
Oh ye! who, sunk in beds of down,
When old hens noise and cackle every where
I'm tauld the Muse ye hae negleckit;
And only quarrels when they call her proud.
At poor old Susan then she railed,
Though in thy name the slaves her bosom wrung,
Broad golden fringe upon the carpet lies:
In solemn tenour and deep organ tone:
Before the dawn in season due should blush,
The Sabbath comes, a day of blessed rest:
And as her mind grew worse and worse,
Now the snail hath made its ring;
And she forgot the chilly autumn breeze;
Might stamp till his shoes and his legs they were lost.
Where the winds howl to the waves' dashing roar;
They bind the wild, poetic rage
I love the muse who sits her down
An asp hid in a group of flowers,
To any one particular beauteous star,
Skill'd in the secret to bestow with grace;
Mantled before in darkness and huge shade,
To buzz among the sallow's early flowers,
Such is Bumtagg the bailiff to a hair,
When the Moon hangs her crescent up on high;
O Thou Great Being! what Thou art
Love, though it is not chill and cold,
He spake, and ceas'd, the while a heavier threat
As hastily retires. The ducks grow wild
The cooper o' Cuddie cam' here awa,
Nor even the _man_ in _private life_ forgot;
I mark'd a martial race portray'd
And sports with half his tail above the waves.
Gie me o' wit an' sense a lift,
And only not to desperation driven,
The hoary cavern, wide surrounding, low'rs.
Who sung a doleful song about green fields,
Sylla was first of victors; but our own,
But, och! it hardens a' within,
And, like new flowers at morning song of bees,
Whence all this mighty cost and blaze of wealth could spring.
Of mortal bondage, by these Spirits supplied,
See from this cavern grim Oppression rise,
They chant their artless notes in simple guise;
Sic hauns as you sud ne'er be faiket,
"Where he will stay till he is dead;
With silent pace, each to his place,
When it is nighing to the mournful house
I'll seek my pursie whare I tint it,
He takes them to His bosom from earth's woes,
In respect for the love and affection he'd show'd her,
Gentle night, do thou befriend me;
He scampered to the bushes far away;
Then top and maintop crowd the sail,
Their savage eyes with unaccustomed lightning.
"A weeping country joins a widow's tear,
Yes! there is ane; a Scottish callan--
Ye high, exalted, virtuous dames,
Of some gold tinge, and plays a roundelay
Into her dream he melted, as the rose
Blaws through the leafless timmer, Sir;
The wanderer in his path. Thus warbled they,
All eyes were on Enceladus's face,
Success to Kenmure's band, Willie!
Fandango twirls his jocund castanet:
When badgers fight, then every one's a foe.
Immense horizon-bounded plains succeed!
Whose green, wild margin now no more erase
In copper-coloured patches flush the sky,
Think on the dungeon's grim confine,
Flew from his lips up to the vaulted rocks,
With stirrup, saddle, or with rein?
Ah, shouldst thou die from my heart-treachery!--
And many pleasures to my vision started;
Sweet early object of my youthful vows!
The rising moon began to glow'r
He has for Christmas and such merry times,
Athwart the morning air: some lady sweet,
That in that fairest lake had placed been,
O that her shining hair was in the sun,
Friends' letters coming from his native place
And throws his hand uncouthly o'er the strings,
Where the blue-bell and gowan lurk lowly unseen;
I lisp'd thy blooming titles inwardly;
The plighted faith; the mutual flame;
"What though I leave this dull, and earthly mould,
Night after night, and day by day, until
And will she leave the wild hedge rose,
Driven by the bomb's incessant thunder-stroke
Our anchors they all broke away and every sheet was gone.
He lean'd; not rising, from supreme contempt.
Where never yet was ought more earthly seen
Alas! nae mair he'll them molest!
So out we went:--Jane's place was reckoned good,
The twin o' that upon her shouther--
The Forum's champion, and the people's chief--
But being too happy in thine happiness,--
Who thus one lamb did lose. Paths there were many,
I hae a wife and twa wee laddies,
And Church and Court did mingle their array,
We wander there, we wander here,
But for this reason, that thou art the King,
Turning the toils of labour into sport;
A fragile dew-drop on its perilous way
That thou, light-winged Dryad of the trees,
Of their passions and their spites;
I'll learn my kin a rattlin' song,
So let me be thy choir, and make a moan
And still she lays as none were ta'en away.
But ill it suited me, in journey dark
An' took my jocteleg an' whatt it,
For boons accorded, goodness ever new,
So may'st thou prosper where thy youth was reared,
Will send you, Korah-like, a-sinkin'
Then, Jamie, I shall say nae mair,
To sit in that honoured station.
Like some old antique fragment weathered brown.
Remembrances with those of all our friends
Or in his cave awaits the Tempest's short-lived shock.
Across the pool their arms unite,
O'er sailing the blue cragginess, a car
Marrying to every word a twinborn sigh;
Then come misfortune, I bid thee welcome,
All hail, Religion! maid divine!
And dust is as it should be, shall I not
But a club of good fellows, like those that are here,
In chastity: yes, Pallas has been sighing,
Then pride might climb the slippery steep,
They bowed and trembled, and they left no sigh,
For once could have thee close to me,
There's sic parade, sic pomp, an' art,
For green fields' merry minstrelsy.
That I should die with it: so in all this
Flash'd phosphor and sharp sparks, without one cooling tear.
O pause not thus, you know me well,
Sparrows fighting on the thatch.
Sure never since king Neptune held his state
Now Clinkumbell, wi' ratlin tow,
When 'mid acclaim, and feasts, and garlands gay,
Each creature on his bounty fed:
Appears to mourn my woefu' case!
Wouldst thou survive the marble or the oak?
Who stood on Latmus' top, what time there blew
Beauties that the earth hath lost;
The Beings of the Mind are not of clay:
Think not of them, thou hast thy music too,--
Pierced by the shaft of banded nations through;
All soothers of sense their soft virtue shall yield,
'Tis dark: quick pattereth the flaw-blown sleet:
When thine shall live and flourish on,
Swains to fold their sheep begin;
But good with ill they also overthrew,
Your duty ye wad sae negleckit,
About me; and the pearliest dew not brings
Fairer than these, though temple thou hast none,
Alone with her good angels, far apart
I feel delighted, still, that you should read them.
Hadst thou taen' aff some drowsy bummle
The cavern wild with tangling roots,
Embower'd sports in Cytherea's isle.
Yet, peace be with their ashes,--for by them,
Whose lips have trembled with a maiden's eyes;
So old, it seeméd only not to fall,
Leave traces in the grass and flowers sweet;
Beware a tongue that's smoothly hung,
As modest want the tale of woe reveals;
clean cottages and genteel houses, they are allowed every liberty to
Yet, though a dreary strain, to this I cling;
Dim-darkening through the flaky show'r,
While I as unconcerned went soodling on,
Ah, that "the friendly e'er should want a friend!"
An' L--d, if once they pit her till't,
He hath no need. He is by nature led
A token and a tone, even from thy father's mould.
His phantasy was lost, where reason fades,
Boast of the agéd! lesson of the young!
Sometime when nae ane see'd him,
And so become immortal."--Thus the God,
A lamb strayed far a-down those inmost glens,
How would your spirits groan in deep vexation,
Flit onward--now a lovely wreath of girls
Of helpless discontent,--hurling my lance
This passion lifted him upon his feet,
And ne'er was heard of more: but 'tis supposed,
At last her feet--I sang to see't--
But from their nature will the Tannen  grow
Yes, Honour decks the turf that wraps their clay!
Ye ken yoursels, for little feck!
I look'd to Heaven, and try'd to pray;
But I'm as blythe that hauds his pleugh,
Who did and does me all the harm he can.
But her full shape would all his seeing fill;
It was a vast and venerable pile;
How have I dwelt in fear of fate: 'tis done--
By the impatience of my early thought,
Yes, thrice have I this fair enchantment seen;
But he whom Sadness sootheth may abide,
Crops to praise, and work in hand,
And spoiled her goodly lands to gild his waste,
None are so desolate but something dear,
If he explores all forms and substances
And freeze, thou bitter-biting frost:
Why stand you thus Good Betty Foy?
I'm tauld ye're driving rarely;
Thus Seasons dancing, life advancing,
On Martinmas eve the dogs did bark,
Death tears the brother of her love
The owls in tuneful concert strive;
Pelted with flowers as he on did pass
Wi' bluidy han' a welcome gies him;
And weel I wat he lo'es me dear:
Fair fa' your honest, sonsie face,
And now for our dear homes.--That strain again!
Or frosty air is keen and still,
Of our own vallies: so I will begin
Queen shall she be in my bosom for ever.
Of strings in hollow shells; and there shall be
Making a marvel that it not decays,
A heart like a lord and a hue like a lady:
The bending body of my active sire;
An elf of mischief and of mettle,
And wi' your weeping let it be;
His gaucie tail, wi' upward curl,
The deuce gae wi'm, to believe, believe me,
A long and lingering sleep, the weary crave.
His briar'd path to some tranquillity.
Sal-alkali o' midge-tail clippings,
Shuffled their sandals o'er the pavement white,
Get out a horsewhip or a jowler,
Lone as I wander'd by each cliff and dell,
Our ancient crown's fa'n in the dust--
A tumult to his heart, and a new life
I rede you right gang ne'er at night,
Oft have I dreamed of Thee! whose glorious name
Grief's gien his heart an unco kickin',
And touch the stubble-plains with rosy hue;
Why will you plead yourself so sad forlorn,
But sorrow and sad sighing care.
To aid thy mind's developement,--to watch
Came booming thus, while still upon his arm
Flow still between us, thou wide roaring main;
The wreath which Dante's brow alone had worn before.
Such is the absorbing hate when warring nations meet!
When all were changing thou alone wert true,
The rifled urn, the violated mound,
Shrunk from his deeds of chivalrous emprize:
The utmost privilege that ocean's sire
How sad death robs us of life's dearest things.
And all the wonders of the mazy range
And left us darkling in a world of tears:)
And I do think that at my very birth
"By G--d, I'll not be seen behint them,
Oh, nocht but love and sorrow join'd,
The crawling brook, that ekes its weary speed,
But when I came roun' by Mauchline town,
What though I am not wealthy in the dower
The free-born wanderer of thy mountain-air;
O, sirs! whae'er wad ha'e expeckit
There's somebody weary wi' lying her lane;
When less barbarians would have cheered him less,
Selictar!  unsheathe then our chief's Scimitār;
Of Satyrs, Fauns, and blear'd Silenus' sighs.
The earth is covered thick with other clay
I wat they glanc'd for twenty miles:
"I saw Osirian Egypt kneel adown
That break against the shore, shall lull thy mind
My wicked rhymes, an' druken rants,
A simple child, dear brother Jim,
Or let me from this heavy prison fly:
And in the gravel shallows lie.
The learned sire and son I saw,
Next came the loveliest pair in all the ring,
And moping owls, to close the lids of day,
A huntress free in"--At this, sudden fell
As other knaves wait room to stink and shine;
The streams with changed magic interlace:
The semblance of gold rocks and bright gold sands,
When kiuttlin' in the fause-house
And now the blossom of the village view,
That chief thou may'st discern;
So cool a purple: taste these juicy pears,
His leathern garb, thorn proof,
A balmy night! and tho' the stars be dim,
And snatched thy shrinking Gods to Northern climes abhorred!
Then, crown'd with flow'ry hay, came Rural Joy,
No--stretch a point to catch a plack;
Alas! life's path may be unsmooth!
Or, it may be, with Demons,  who impair
They dazzle our een, as they flee to our hearts.
So gazing on thy greatness, made men blind
Headlong I darted; at one eager swirl
Is made of the four seasons--manifest
And cried, "I've caught you then at last!"
What is life when wanting love?
Then Lamia breath'd death breath; the sophist's eye,
What are our petty griefs?--let me not number mine.
Nought earthly worth my compassing; so stand
And leave the crickets in the hearth
Sae white her teeth, sae sweet her mou',
To stigmatize false friends of thine
Till sparkling billows seemed to light the banks they lave.
The old fox plays and dances round her young.
And she came far from over the main.
In the comfortless vault of disease.
And said, in a new voice, but sweet as love,
And when ye're number'd wi' the dead,
So thick with leaves and mosses, that they seem'd
And now she's high upon the down,
And cheeks all pale, which but an hour ago
And in each face he saw a gleam of light,
'Till presently he hears a squeak,
May gaze on ghastly trophies of the slain,
And others, driving loose their herds at will,
He slants his neck beneath the waters bright
"And mony a friend that kiss'd his caup,
From silv'ry ripple, up to beauty's queen;
But shall thy legal rage pursue
In aid soft warble from the Dorian flute;
Her strength, her wealth, her site of ancient days;
Your pride has wronged your own heart's blood;
Beheld him win two realms, and, happier, yield his breath.
Heaven's gates, and Æthon snort his morning gold
And each one seems so anxious at the heart
Where my poor heart lost all its fortitude:
To the miller and, dearer still, to his three bonny daughters.
So keeping up an interchange of favours,
When on my ear this plaintive strain
Anna, thy charms my bosom fire,
He pac'd away the pleasant hours of ease
If not, o'er one fallen Despot boast no more!
Of Cynthia he heard not, though rough briar
There is a pleasure in the pathless woods,
When o'er the sea-rock's edge we go;
An' Chatham's wraith, in heavenly graith,
When a' the fairest maids were met,
Deep in the shady sadness of a vale
For thee, wi' a' thy thousan' mark;
For Nannie, far before the rest,
Come ease, or come travail; come pleasure or pain;
Through many a cypress-grove within each city's ken.
But for the main, here found they covert drear.
My father's nets, or watched, when from the fold
In rain and dew still warm and dry;
For through your orbs he's ta'en his flight,
But ere the course o' life be thro',
An' my auld mither brunt the trin'le.
The tree will wither long before it fall;
The pathless wild, and wimpling burn,
Though foes made double what they heard of all,
And yet thy benediction passeth not
With the wild world I dwelt in, is a thing
Of love deep learned to the red heart's core:
And in the mirk and dreary drift
O lank-eared Phantoms of black-weeded pools!
The sweet-lipp'd ladies have already greeted
That aft ha'e made us black and blae,
Where a black quagmire quakes beneath the tread,
Can burst Joy's grape against his palate fine;
Wi' dukes and lords let Selkirk mix,
That heart transpierc'd with many a wound;
How shall your houseless heads and unfed sides,
Endymion sat down, and 'gan to ponder
He wears the shattered links of the World's broken chain.
Of all that flattered--followed--sought, and sued:
'Mid Lawson's  port intrench'd his hold,
That thus it passes smoothly, quietly.
In the flood, round the moorcock dashes under the billow;
There was a lass, they ca'd her Meg,
The devil has got the auld wife on his back;
Fix'd on the floor, saw many a sweeping train
May Heaven protect my bonnie Scots laddie,
Horrible mysteries in the gulph stare through,
That gently stirs the blossom'd bean,
For thus the royal mandate ran,
Those lips shall be my Delphos, and shall speak
He ne'er was gien to great misguiding,
Of mouldy damps and charnel crust
Young, royal Tarry Breeks, I learn,
Fit retribution! Gaul may champ the bit
And half discovered wings, and glances keen.
Is he slain by Highlan' bodies?
To taste the luxury of sunny beams
Whaever has met wi' my Phillis,
A fig for those by law protected!
Kissing, not ruffling, the blue deep's serene:--
Oh! who that gallant spirit shall resume,
Up to its climax and then dying proudly?
The latent grandeur of thy dwelling-place.
Better than e'er the fairest she he meets:
My Jockey toils upon the plain,
A busy, bustling, still repeated dream;
Of all the chances in their earthly walk;
In fancy, fair St. Agnes in her bed,
Here souter Hood in death does sleep;--
His Life, his Fame, his Grave, though rifled--not thine own.
Full flashes on the Soul the light of ages,
And fools may tyne, and knaves may win
So deep and very deep the place has been,
And blue and bluidy bruised her;
Oft have I brought thee flowers, on their stalks set
A slave to love's unbounded sway,
Might charm the first of human kind.
The sweetest hours that e'er I spend
Fear not clouds will always lour.
Into the vaulted, boundless emerald.
Until it reached a splashing fountain's side
Then vanish'd all the lovely lights;
When August winds the heather wave,
Oh! can she bear so base a heart,
As, supperless to bed they must retire,
Or I have dream'd."--"Yes," said the supreme shape,
Eolian magic from their lucid wombs:
"And wear thou this,"--she solemn said,
The woods and fields are painted new.
In tremulous noise, that bids, at every breath,
And birds from coverts innermost and drear
And ev'ry time great care is ta'en,
And nearer--clearer--deadlier than before!
One sometimes meets a pleasant sward
There lives a lass in yonder park,
One warm, flush'd moment, hovering, it might seem
Now lads on shore may sigh, and maids believe :
To you I sing my grief-inspired strains:
Wi' dying yell, the Tories fell,
But Peace destroyed what War could never blight,
Deem ye what bounds the rival realms divide?
For why? that GOD the good adore
But plays at taw, and buys his Spanish juice.
An' there will be wealthy young Richard,
Anon the strange voice is upon the wane--
I think I maun wed him to morrow.
A filbert hedge with wild briar overtwined,
Of marble men and maidens overwrought,
Then heave aboard your grapple airn,
Parent of our Religion! whom the wide
To get them ready for the market day.
Father with us sends love untill he hears
To that worst pitch of all, which wears a reasoning show.
Thou wast the charm of women, lovely Moon!
When thowes dissolve the snawy hoord,
Must thou, the noble, gen'rous, great,
I was a lonely youth on desert shores.
Oh, known the earliest, and esteemed the most!
And maidenly modesty fixes the chain.
Breeds in the love-sick maid who gazes at it,
But such a one, on English ground,
Along the prow, and saw all these unite
'Twas not for fiction chose Rousseau this spot,
We'll gently walk, and sweetly talk,
Sore-harass'd out with care and grief,
I count my health my greatest wealth,
And when dark tempests mimic thunder made--
The loveliest moon, that ever silver'd o'er
'Twas laurell'd Martial roaring murther!
As yet ye little ken about the matter,
Which close beside the thorn you see,
Before his weary pilgrimage begun:
An' no to rin an' wear his cloots,
For still he knows and by your corner chair
To thy far wishes will thy streams obey:
Increasing gradual to a tempest rage,
Beautiful slaves, and Lamia's self, appear,
Thou layest them, with all their cares,
Or if you on your station tarrow,
Belyve, the elder bairns come drapping in,
Dost thou forget, sham Monarch of the Waves,
Aimed with her poisoned arrows,--but to miss.
And knowing surely she could never win
We two had sung, like little birds in May.
The partridge too, that scarce can trust
The town so long, the town so wide,
Or e'en the touch of Archimago's wand,
And in its time the spell was snapt,
That I can think away from thee and live!--
And touch the strings into a mystery;
There's nothing can appear more plain
Walk'st in the shadow of the midnight hour
With thee thus wandering, moralizing on,
The lang lad they ca' Jumpin' John
And took a lute, from which there pulsing came
In lines extended lang and large,
Poor gapin', glowrin' Superstition,
Match me, ye harems of the land! where now
My fondly-fluttering heart, be still:
Melted into a languor. He return'd
Think ye, are we less blest than they,
They won, and passed away--is this the whole?
Stand, but in mockery of his withered power,
For that same gen'rous spirit smart!
In all of thee sure thy Esopus shares.
But I cam through the Tysday's dew,
Wild nature's tenants freely, gladly stray;
Something unearthly, which they deem not of,
Strength to bear it will be given,
We're fit to win our daily bread,
Nor breath of sleeping dove, nor river's flow,--
Ah! courteous Sir Knight, with large joy thou art crown'd;
Of tuneful relics proudly claims and keeps,
Or were I monarch o' the globe,
Mankind have felt their strength, and made it felt.
The Marineres gave it biscuit-worms,
The sunshine for a while, and downward go
And, on the sudden, fainting with surprise,
Her light through thy sole aperture; to those
Ance mair I hail thee wi' sorrow and care:
Nae nightly bogle make it eerie;
If sleekit Chatham Will was livin';
And shaping visions all about my sight
High as the berries of a wild ash tree,
Me to behold thee thus in last extreme:
All silently their tears of Love instil,
Then to the crowded circus forth they fare:
Has not thy story's purity; it is
And scorpion critics cureless venom dart.
A bitter coolness; the ripe grape is sour:
But these and half their fame have passed away,
And desolate Consort--vainly wert thou wed!
His goblets brimmed with every costly wine,
Come from the galaxy: anon he sports,--
A God unto thyself; nor less the same
Then age and want--oh! ill-match'd pair!--
We'll e'en let the subject alane.
The earth heaved under them with such a groan,
Or for Colean the rout is ta'en,
Tho' glory's name may screen us:
Till they be fit to fend themsel;
To embracements warm as theirs makes coy excuse.
Upon the murderous spot she seem'd to grow,
Now to o'erthrow a fool, and now to shake a throne.
In tender pressure. And as a willow keeps
Of his fair eyes run liquid through their souls.
Embolden'd thus, I beg you'll hear
Of my own breast thou shalt, beloved youth!"
Where gold and bribery's guilt prevails,
And now broad wings. Most awfully intent
Arise--arise! the morning is at hand;--
And their glad animal movements all gone by,)
They gave each other's cheeks; with all their sighs,
The green woodpecker bounces from the view
Makes this alarum in the elements,
And pauses by the hedgerow gap;
For ever panting, and for ever young;
Of flowering bays, that I may die a death
Or on thy buttressed roots to sit, and lean
And plunder'd of its load of blessedness.
More worthy riches worse than me.
Again he comes; nor dart nor lance avail,
Not hiding up an Apollonian curve
In Paisley John's, that night at e'n,
As nothing did we die; but Life will suit
While flitting sea-fowl round me cry,
Ilk sportsman youth bemoan'd a father;
A gold-green zenith 'bove the Sea-God's head.
Thro' the Lawlands, o'er the border,
Of innocence oercome by flattering man,
"When ripen'd fields, and azure skies,
Whereat the Urchin points and laughs with all his soul.
Yet deem not thence his breast a breast of steel:
There was, indeed, in far less polish'd days,
Sharpening, by degrees, his appetite
And the parle of voices thund'rous;
Full swiftly Harold wends his lonely way
Wi' tippenny, we fear nae evil;
Dank night, and gained eternal day.
And spring will cleed the birken shaw;
Unnumber'd buds, an' flow'rs delicious spoils,
They, ardent, kindling spirits, pour;
Like the remembered tone of a mute lyre,
And if reluctantly the eyes resign
This dusk religion, pomp of solitude,
Had not on earth whereon to lay his head:
To lose, at once, all my toil breeding fire,
With urging bark and hurries at his heels.
Once formed thy Paradise, as not aware
The past was bad, and the future hid;
That sic a couple fate allows ye
Around their axle! Then these gleaming reins,
And long with this whistle all Scotland shall ring.
In the  midst of their own brightness;
Here must we leave thee."--At these words up flew
On the burnt wings of mid-day zephyrs come,--
My heart aches, and a drowsy numbness pains
By our eternal hopes, to soothe, to assuage,
What dire events ha'e taken place!
Nor wanting ghosts of Tory fame.
By oppression's woes and pains!
Not undevoid of beauty there they come,
Bay leaves were crackling in the fragrant pile,
And near a thousand tables pined, and wanted food.
Indeed, locks bright enough to make me mad;
Sin' I was to the butching bred,
That reaches oer the street from wall to wall.
When her old bones were cold and chill,
His setting beam ne'er shone upon.
I hate the very noise of troublous man
Ne personage of high or mean degree
I caught a finger: but the downward weight
Green tufted islands casting their soft shades
A tod meikle waur than the clerk;
Just ae hauf muchkin does me prime,
And now I find thee living, I will pour
Fairer than Phoebe's sapphire-region'd star,
Saint Stephen's boys, wi' jarring noise,
Dewy with Nature's tear-drops, as they pass--
I ne'er was struck before that hour
The saul o' life, the heaven below,
There as he lay, the Heaven with its stars
Him whom she loves, her idiot boy?
That I in feeblest accents must adore.
Alecto's serpents; ravishments more keen
In its next verdure, when this fiery mass
And months would come, and months would go, and all in sunny mood,
Brings hard owrehip, wi' sturdy wheel,
Who hath forsaken old and sacred thrones
Into the wide stream came of purple hue--
Of mingled wine, out-sparkling generous light;
It is thy voice--divinest! Where?--who? who
Could agonize me more than baby-words
From him no harm my babe can take,
The negligently grand, the fruitful bloom
That Indian wealth may lustre throw
The lang lad they ca' Jumpin' John
Fatal to Roman rashness, more at home;
The lamb agen the old ewe stops,
Striving to be itself, what dungeon climes
Temper'd with coolness. How they ever wrestle
Press me so sweetly. Now I swear at once
The men cast out in party matches,
An' wha on Ayr your chanters tune!
The pleasures that will ne'er return:
"Thou hast dream'd of me; and awaking up
The marled plaid ye kindly spare,
And silvery was its passing: voices sweet
Stood bright, amid the sorrow of his peers?
And find at night a sheltering cave,
The flower and pride of a' the glen;
That I might catch poetic skill,
Not such the workings of their moon-struck brain;
And a' the hills wi' echoes roar,
And hopeless, comfortless, I'll mourn
Is in Apollo's hand: our dazed eyes
That Indian-like bepaints its little thighs,
The man was seen alive no more!--
Then, straught or crooked, yird or nane,
Up went the hum celestial. High afar
Yet without sin he suffered more
Dearly bought, the hidden treasure,
Ye dark waste hills, and brown unsightly plains,
Left the shop all the day to take care of itself.
Look through thine own, nor curb the lust of War,
Of former Sovereigns, and the antique brood
Meg was meek, and Meg was mild,
An' tho' fatigu'd wi' close employment,
Yet but awhile the slumbering weather flings
Where Nature, nor too sombre nor too gay,
And oh, the little warlike world within!
And mesh my dewy flowers all the night.
Sweet the streamlet's limpid lapse
To mortals, of their little week;
Truth, weeping, tells the mournful tale,
Wad move the very hearts o' stanes!
I know that thou wilt love me: though my name
There ye may creep, and sprawl, and sprattle
With sanguine feverous boiling gurge of pulse.
If ancient tales say true, nor wrong these holy men.
And ceased to chop and wondered at the fray.
Fixing his downward eye, he many an hour
And frae my een the drapping rains
Or they rehearse, in equal verse,
And to the left, three yards beyond,
Some luckless hour will send him linkin
Lament in rhyme, lament in prose,
Highmindedness, a jealousy for good,
Its clouds were other-country mountains,
Still sweeten more these banks of Rhine!
Wrote on his faded brow curst Cain's unresting doom.
O folly! for to bear all naked truths,
Somebody tells the poacher-court
And she a lovely little flower,
Whose honour is proof to the storm,
The warpin' o't, the winnin' o't;
Swallows obeying the south summer's call,
Of harmony, to where it aye will poise
Which comes of thought and musing: give us help!"
The trembling earth resounds his tread,
And what is this day's strong suggestion?
And ay, they dimpl't wi' a smile,
Perhaps he's turned himself about,
With daring Milton through the fields of air:
Fare thee weel, thou first and fairest!
Those records dear of transports past;
Sic fate, ere lang, shall thee betide,
Though mountains rise, and deserts howl,
Louder they talk, and louder come the strains
The lassie thought na lang till day.
The sick found health in his reply;
Whose silken fins, and golden scales' light
Alas! what bitter toil an' straining--
From the white flock, but pass'd unworried
But in old marbles ever beautiful.
Titus or Trajan's? No--'tis that of Time:
What makes heroic strife, fam'd afar, fam'd afar?
Then in a wailful choir the small gnats mourn
Pass by her door--'tis seldom shut--
Patience! and ye shall hear what he beheld
While through the ragged roof and chinky wall,
How his own goddess was past all things fair,
In him existence, and o'erflowing teems
Thy daughters bright thy walks adorn,
And wakeful caution still aware
A country with--aye, or without mankind;
Love in a palace is perhaps at last
O, would they stay aback frae courts,
And could the ceaseless vultures cease to prey
Then, not unequal to the Florentine,
But did na Jeanie's heart loup light,
The ploughman finished many a bout,
No more a-winding the course of yon river,
As that which stripes the woodbine oer her head;
But now not one of saddening thousands weeps,
Of underwood, and to the sound is bent,
Cooped in their wingéd sea-girt citadel;
From lovely woman: while brimful of this,
One thousand years!--Is it then possible
I modestly fu' fain wad hint it,
Adieu to Ganges and their pleasant fields!
Still grant us with such store,
Then with thy sultry locks all loose and rude,
Why were ye not awake? But ye were dead
Who made the heart, 'tis He alone
A spring of love gusht from my heart,
But, heedless of the following gloom,
A money mong'ring, pitiable brood.
Nor with aught else can our souls interknit
And by the arm he held her fast,
For hut and palace show like filthily:
Or deposite her sair won penny-fee,
Which reigns when mountains tremble, and the birds
But we've wander'd mony a weary foot,
From cruel parents, or relentless fair;
Wandering in youth, I traced the path of him,
Of Memnon's image at the set of sun
And Jura answers, through her misty shroud,
With damp and slippery footing from a depth
How could you raise so vile a bustle,
They make your youthful fancies reel;
Their Parent-pair their secret homage pay,
Your Latin names for horns an' stools;
Thy sons ne'er madden in the fierce extremes
Of feet still bustling round with busy glee,
"Lazy hussy" my parents both call me,
And where they fly for dinner no one knows--
O leave novels, ye Mauchline belles,
Love's image upon earth without his wing,
The fair assembly wander'd to and fro,
Had fixed him with the Cæsars in his fate
"Up! Up! and drink the spirit breath'd
'Tis thine, sweet baby, there to rest:
But all too late,--so are we doubly curst.
In sort of wakeful swoon, perplex'd she lay,
But then to see how ye're negleckit,
The youngster's artless heart o'erflows wi' joy,
Between us sinks and all which ever glowed,
Had grown Suspicion's sanctuary, and chose,
On the nineteenth of October, by eleven of the clock,
Of my rough verses not an hour misspent;
In the half-glutted hollows of reef-rocks,
And now! ah, I see it--you just now are stooping
Then like a swine to puke and wallow,
Farewell, ye dungeons dark and strong,
As loud as any mill, or near it,
Mark the winds, and mark the skies;
Five tomahawks, wi' bluid red-rusted;
O! wae gae by his wanton sides,
With emphasis of speech oer murdered worms.
Upon the boundaries of day and night,
The while: Ah! thou must needs the lady wed,
Thick flies the skimming swallow;
Friend of my life! my ardent spirit burns,
The dregs were wormwood; but he filled again,
With fortune's vain delusion, O,
He up the Gateslack to my black cousin Bess,
Thy creature here before Thee stands,
The good-night blush of eve was waning slow,
And on these barren rocks, with juniper,
On that a set o' chaps at watch,
"Alas!" said he, "were I but always borne
And scorn was ever standing bye;
For care and trouble set your thought,
Your wives they ne'er had missed ye.
Nor love nor joy is mine again.
And hoot and drive them from their graceless waste
An' drink his health in auld Nanse Tinnock's
"But he is neither far nor near,
The name of Arethusa. On the verge
Been snaw-white seventeen hunder linen,
Imagination gave a dizzier pain.
And I'll place it in her breast,
Down through tress-lifting waves the Nereids fair
What breast so dead to heavenly virtue's glow,
Scarce seen, but with fresh bitterness imbued;
What hallows it upon this Christian shore?
The robin pensive autumn cheer,
And other monsters rise when those are gone,
From soiling dew the butter-cup
They stung the feather'd horse: with fierce alarm
Whose fertile bounties here extend to all,
When from my foot a bird did flee--
The black ant's city, by a rotten tree,
Thou, who didst grudge him even that fleeting span,
Cold as the crags upon his native coast,
For, not unhappy in her Master's love,
Her knitting twisting oer her thumb,
For my ancestral faults or mine, the wound
She tripped by the banks of Ern,
Should e'er the fine-eyed maid to me be kind,
Unlawful magic, and enticing lies.
What sacred Trophy marks the hallowed ground,
My stumblings down some monstrous precipice:
Of icy pinnacles, and dipp'dst thine arms
Uplifted drowsily, and nervy tails
And the flybitten horse at the old smithy post
Things of ignoble or of savage mood,
Of Neptune; and the sea nymphs round his state,
He's danc'd awa, he's danc'd awa,
She took the reins, when this was said,
To thrum guitars, an' fecht wi' nowt;
By all forgotten, save the lonely breast,
Angelic forms, high Heaven's peculiar care!
By faint degrees, voice, lute, and pleasure ceased;
These sweeten summer in their happy glee
So I turned myself round and she wandered away.
But worth and truth eternal youth
Sweet is the lore which nature brings;
Friend not inanimate--though stocks and stones
'Cross the broad table, to beseech a glance
Not flowers budding in an April rain,
'Twas mist and rain, and storm and rain,
Its joys and griefs alike resign.
Down flow'd her robe, a tartan sheen,
Ah! you list to the nightingale's tender condoling,
Enclasped to my faithfu' breast,
My peace with these, my love with those--
Thy winning graces;--to be thy defender
Farewell to the bushy clump close to the river
While my dear lad maun face his faes,
The place and time I met my dearie!
But the tinker he grumbled and cried Fiddle-dee!
Had it but been from hands less near--in this
And ravenous plague, all perished: every tear
Thou Power Supreme, whose mighty scheme
Yet to the remnants of thy Splendour past
The life-blood streaming thro' my heart,
'Till aft his guidness is abus'd;
How chang'd, how full of ache, how gone in woe!
"Lamia!" he shriek'd; and nothing but the shriek
Spirit of Freedom! when on Phyle's brow
And then, it may be, of his wish to roam
Linger awhile upon some bending planks
They take religion in their mouth;
Open thine eyes eterne, and sphere them round
Will make they hair, tho' erst from gipsy polled,
The glittering spears are ranked ready;
My soul page after page, till well-nigh won
The pedant swung his felon cudgel round,
Of all my life was utmost quietude:
With wings of gentle flush o'er delicate white,
A famish'd pilgrim,--saved by miracle.
A brother's sigh! a sister's tear!
Of what I heard, and how it made me weep,
What is more tranquil than a musk-rose blowing
That man should take such pains
The last still loveliest, till--'tis gone--and all is gray.
An' Quintin, o' lads not the worst.
Yet, so it was, a ewe I bought;
Alas! developed, opens the decay,
He saw not the two maidens, nor their smiles,
And tolled on flowers as Summer gales went by.
What says she, my dearest, my Phely?
Yet these I leave as thoughtless as a lark;
By some auld, houlet-haunted biggin,
Shun the fierce storms among the sheltering rocks;
With their own sweet delight, and ever nestle
Those two sad streams adown a fearful dell.
A lover of the meadows and the woods,
The smoothest mossy bed and deepest, where
Wi' reekit duds, an' reestit gizz,
In youth She was all glory,--a new Tyre,--
You chang'd the footpath for the grassy plain.
Whoe'er would betray him, on high may he swing;
sugar, and be welcome all summer long. They look like things of mind
Tells to my fearful breast a tale of sorrow,
Of mony a joy and hope bereav'd me,
Thy hopes will soon deceive thee.
To deck her lone and lovely brow
Forgot the land, the sons, the maids of Spain;
Then ye may tell, how pell and mell,
Ilk ghaist that haunts auld ha' or chaumer,
For a big-bellied bottle's the whole of my care.
Now nature cleeds the flowery lea,
Say, thou lo'es nane before me;
Nor fix on fond abodes to circumscribe thy prayer!
Grant me but this, I ask no more,
A third is in the race! who is the third,
I bow full hearted to your old decree!
The flowers decay'd on Catrine lea,
Sprung from night, in darkness lost;
Twin roses by the zephyr blown apart
He stretch'd himself in grief and radiance faint.
May temper it to bear,--it is but for a day.
Why of your further aid bereave me?
Proving upon this element, dismay'd,
While bees delight in op'ning flowers;
Wha in yon cavern grim an' sootie,
Of heaven appear'd to open for my flight,
But e'er a month or two had past,
And Willie hame to Logan braes!
With forehead to the soothing breezes bare,
For when the Muse's wings are air-ward spread,
When thou was corn't, an' I was mellow,
Lay where their roots are; but a brook hath ta'en--
When the Night doth meet the Noon
Of powerful instruments:--the gorgeous dyes,
About the wilds they hunt with spear and horn,
Hues which have words, and speak to ye of Heaven,
She will bring, in spite of frost,
Or stately Lugar's mossy fountains boil,
Through half the clear blue sky will go,
Full in the speculation of the stars.
For the auld gudeman o' London court
Sat silently. Love's madness he had known:
We will drain our dearest veins,
Than that in which the brother Poets joy'd,
O'er prostrate Asia;--thou, who with thy frown
'Till a' their weel-swall'd kytes belyve
Accept this mark of friendship, warm, sincere,--
And swore he could toss it all off at a pull.
He travels on, and in his face, his step,
And hold my faculties so long in thrall,
There curl'd a purple mist around them; soon,
Apart let me wander, apart let me muse,
Her soft arms were entwining me, and on
In worship of an echo: in the crowd
And, an it dodg'd a water-sprite,
"Is no one near to help me? No fair dawn
That freshly terminate in open plains,
Henceforth to meet with unconcern
That they are still the air, the subtle food,
In wars at hame I'll spend my blood,
And Life, that bloated Ease can never hope to share.
I look upon the peopled desert past,
Sudden a thought came like a full-blown rose,
He smelt their ilka hole and road,
"Susan! they'll both be here anon."
Through clear and cloudy, even when she went
Then, pretty dear, be not afraid;
Most humbly own--'tis dear, dear admiration!
And in an instant all was dark:
Mourn him, thou sun, great source of light!
While I can either sing or whissle,
I wonder didna turn thy stomach.
The ripples seem right glad to reach those cresses,
Profuse of joy--or 'gainst it did she war,
This wayward brother to his rightful joys!
The thick-ribbed walls that o'ershadow the gate
Wha count on poortith as disgrace--
Thy shores are empires, changed in all save thee--
To tie a shoestring that the grass unties--
The monsters of the deep are made--each Zone
Heav'n rest his soul, whare'er he be!
O' Paradise could yield me joy;
And Winter smile his frowns to Spring, in beauty's happy clime;
He'd die before he'd wrong it--'tis decorum.--
That gave soft music from Armida's bowers,
Were flowers from Adam's open gardens;
Nae lav'rock sang on hillock green,
Not in the air shall these my words disperse,
Then off she hies, but with a prayer
Oh! had each Scot of ancient times,
Disclosing rock, and slope, and forest brown,
Whate'er thou hast done, be it late, be it soon,
Said he'd help them an hour ere he'd keep them adry;
The boy that goes to fodder with surprise
Aye, his lull'd soul was there, although upborne
Of the wild cat's eyes, or the silvery stems
A grey-haired man--he loved this little boy,
Peona of the woods!--Can she endure--
His eldritch squeel and gestures,
I love the fair face of the maid in her youth,
Its chambers desolate, and portals foul:
Fondles the flower amid the sobbing rain.
Immortal, for thou art of heavenly race:
His eyes from the dead leaves, or one small pulse
I like the lasses--Gude forgie me!
Its foam against the skies, reluctant spares
That smile us on to tell delightful stories.
This life, sae far's I understand,
Frae colleges and boarding-schools,
The bloated wassaillers will never heed:--
Here lie the loving husband's dear remains,
Two palms and then two plantains, and so on,
When the soundless earth is muffled,
Then, like a new fledg'd bird that first doth shew
An' honest Lucky; no to roose you,
And will she leave the lowly clowns
And the Serai's impenetrable tower
And almost turn'd her brain to tinder.
"I taught thy manners-painting strains,
And oftentimes I talked to him,
Who is proof to thy personal converse and wit,
Calm sheltered haven of eternal rest!
Moving about as in a gentle wind,
Or mite-horn shavings, filings, scrapings,
True Campbells, Frederick an' Hay;
The warpin' o't, the winnin' o't;
Fu' lightly rase I in the morn,
While the jail-mastiff howls at the dull clanking chain,
You hear it now if e'er you can.
Power dwelt amidst her passions; in proud state
More restless than the swallow in the skies:
His black-eyed maids of Heaven, angelically kind.
Where hundreds labour to support
And give all his hopes the lie?
A fool and knave are plants of every soil;
Like a sharp spear, went through her utterly,
Death hath but little left him to destroy!
And Sanguinetto tells ye where the dead
To force himself upon you, and infest
Unconscious what danger awaits?
Of Flora, and old Pan: sleep in the grass,
To wear it? who can curiously behold
O tell me, lonely Goddess, by thy harp,
The cowslip-gathering at May's dewy prime;
An' your auld burro' mony a time,
And die away in ardent mutterings.
When they St. Agnes' wool are weaving piously."
Thy loveliness in dismal elements;
And wholesale errors swallows in the next.
Or the familiar visiting of one
My friends I left behind me for other places new,
That aye at fall of night our care condoles.
He soon could write with the pen: and from that time,
Then wherefore sully the entrusted gem
A vivid lightning from that dreadful bow.
May he, who will, his recollections rake,
Of life from charitable voice? No sweet saying
Then let your schemes alone, in the state, in the state;
With art's most polish'd blaze.
If his sweet boy he could forsake,
The ghost of folly haunting my sweet dreams."
Who can so well the toil of War endure?
O for the gentleness of old Romance,
Of native air--let me but die at home."
Sharp is the knife, and sudden is the stroke;
And howling, to his Gods, where haply lies
High as the level of a man's breast rear'd
She said with trembling chance: "Is this the cause?
Hyperion arose, and on the stars
Down twenty little falls, through reeds and bramble,
A living death was in each gush of sounds,
Ye'll snap your fingers, poor an' hearty,
Cool'd a long age in the deep-delved earth,
And now his fingers o'er it he did fling,
And points to yonder cliffs, which oft were won and lost.
It's tauld he was a sodger bred,
Of these new-form'd art thou, oh brightest child!
Parting wi' Nancy, oh! ne'er to meet mair.
O spare the dear blossom, ye orient breezes,
With toying oars and silken sails they glide,
"With future hope, I oft would gaze,
With gentle quiet's bland and sober train,
May guardian angels tak a spell,
The clanging sugh of whistling wings is heard;
I leave to tyrants and their slaves;
My sullen steps; another 'fore my eyes
All nature owns with one accord
Chill o'er his slumbers piles the drifty heap!
And Phœbe bends towards him crescented.
Their silver bellies on the pebbly sand.
The world is taking little heed
Of cups and goblets, and the store thrice told
Scar'd frae its minnie and the cleckin
And fevers into false creation:--where,
The Moon is up; by Heaven, a lovely eve!
An' pour your creeshie nations;
Within a windowed niche of that high hall
Then up wi' him my ploughman lad,
And stood to tell him what I found.
And dabbling keep within their charges' sight;
The unruffled mirror of the loveliest dream
But is not Doria's menace  come to pass?
With hopes and fears at foil and play,
But wherefore this? What care, though owl did fly
There, racer Jess, and twa-three wh-res,
And sma,' sma' prospect of relief,
At once may illustrate and honour my story.
Accusers by their conscience chid,
Whose strong right hand has ever been
Those towering horses and their mournful freight.
Adown winding Nith I did wander,
Whose songs have charms to sweeten solitude.
But round my heart the ties are bound,
That for themselves a cooling covert make
As legends of the ancient time,
Of Contemplation; and the azure gloom
And glossy bees at noon do fieldward pass,
And bring no book; for this one day
He claw'd her wi' the ripplin-kame,
What taste of purer air hast thou to soothe
Grow impious." So he inwardly began
It seem'd he flew, the way so easy was;
Thou strik'st the dull peasant--he sinks in the dark,
Tell not the deed to blushing Europe's ears;
Shall pilgrims, pensive, but unwearied, throng;
May ne'er his gen'rous, honest heart,
The camp, the host, the fight, the Conqueror's career,
Darkness like midnight from the sobbing woods
All its more ponderous and bulky worth
Those lips, O slippery blisses, twinkling eyes,
These are thy toys, and, as the snowy flake,
She turns the key wi' cannie thraw,
She prophesy'd, that late or soon,
With yellow breast and head of solid gold.
Lest she should drown herself therein.
The trees and summer happy seem;
And oer the sameness of the purple sky
He climbs the highest tree to see them ride--
Of Coelus, from the universal space,
A net whose thraldom was more bliss than all
The sheep and cows are crowding for a share
Th' inconstant blast howl'd thro' the darkening air,
Cam frae her een sae bonnie blue.
And there--oh! sweet and sacred be the name!--
And the book nought the waur--let me tell you;
Then Scylla, blushing sweetly from her dream,
Yet once he struggled 'gainst the Demon's sway,
And Betty's drooping at the heart,
"And when the bard, or hoary sage,
Some Washington again may head them,
But with thy beauty will I deaden it.
Tossed like a little boat at sea,
No pleasure now, and no desire.
With backward footing through the shade a space:
And they shall be accounted poet kings
There have I sat by many a tree
Call'd him soft names in many a mused rhyme,
And woo the vision to my vacant breast:
"A countra laird had ta'en the batts,
Touch'd his wide shoulders, after bending low
And justly smart beneath his sin-avenging rod.
And their faint cracklings o'er our silence creep
When the bee-hive casts its swarm;
The foot of horse, the voice of man;
My muse to dream of such a theme,
Your hallowed names, in this unholy place,
Ye'll fasten to him like a brier,
Of Proserpine, when Hell, obscure and hot,
And see how dearly earned Torquato's fame,
For you, no bred to barn and byre,
Caught infant-like from the far-foamed sands.
And scarce three steps, ere Music's golden tongue
To take of pleasaunce each his secret share,
Here leans the idle shepherd on his crook,
None else shall take the right she missed
Till, like the certain wands of Jacob's wit,
Answering thus, just as the golden morrow
The Marineres all 'gan pull the ropes,
And bent by circumstance, and thereby blind
So, when dark thoughts my boding spirit shroud,
Of sober thought? Or when starting away,
It's ten to one ye'll find him snug in
Is it departing pangs my soul alarms?
And let him hing and roar and yell,
And mounts in spray the skies, and thence again
Then Mary Bayfield seeks the glen,
An old man dwells, a little man,
Mixed in one mighty scene, with varied beauty glow.
Or wavering like the bauckie-bird,
Beyond a mortal man impassion'd far
Ay, in those days the Muses were nigh cloy'd
With an unbidden presence the bright throng
Thro' a' thy childish years I'll e'e thee,
With curl'd gray beard, sharp eyes, and smooth bald crown,
Would keep a sinking ship frae wreck.
To aid them in the darkest night
That saddening hour when bad men hotlier press:
Our vows are wanting to our great god Pan.
He onward kept; wooing these thoughts to steal
With the bright mists about the mountains hoar
Here Machiavelli's earth returned to whence it rose.
She's past the bridge that's in the dale,
Where gorgeous Tyranny hath thus amassed
What time the moon was lost behind a cloud,
Our spirits, fann'd away by thy light pinions.
And hast thou crost that unknown river
And soon, returning from love's banishment,
Of foolscap dance with poesy's measured feet,
Oh leave me not in this eternal woe,
In the recesses of a pearly shell.
And prayer-book next, much worn though strongly bound,
"And send the godly in a pet to pray."
O heavy loss, thy country ill could bear!
And horses browsed among the flags and sedge,
Which poets vainly pave with sands of gold,
Who hath not journeyed in this native hell.
And pledge him. The bald-head philosopher
Have ye beheld his chariot, foam'd along
Farewell to the torrents and loud-pouring floods.
But what a weary wight can please,
And on the curl hangs pausing: not in vain
And dream, when in the serpent prison-house,
And the thyme it is wither'd, and rue is in prime.
_His_ Country's ruin added to the mass
But loathed the bravo's trade, and laughed at martial wight.
From round its gentle stem; let the young fawns,
Whare ghaists and houlets nightly cry.--
And binds the mire like a rock;
On which her idiot boy must ride,
Wad melt the hardest whunstane!
Two liquid pulse streams 'stead of feather'd wings,
Then Meg took up her spinnin' graith,
To hardy independence bravely bred,
Pruned their wet wings in bushes by the brook.
An' in the depth of science mir'd,
Yet marvel not, Sir Childe, that I
By British hands, which it had best behoved
Close to the source, bright, pure, and undefil'd,
The lark was lost in him; cold springs had run
Your blinded eyes, worst foes to you,
And tantalizes long; at last he drinks,
Than blossoms to the moss-rose tree,
I'd take the rascal by the nose,
All things are here of _Him_; from the black pines,
Doth lean his boyish form along the rock,
A full-born beauty new and exquisite?
Nor, with their green and simple hue, disturb
For, never since thy griefs and woes began,
His eyes with marking the storm-driven leaves;
Loud roars the wild inconstant blast;
On the deer's tender haunches: late, and loth,
And, knee-deep in claret, he'd die or he'd yield.
To _friendship's_ port I steer'd my course,
Down from the ceiling's height, pouring a noise
For thee, and thee alone I live.
No sleep till morn, when Youth and Pleasure meet
In laughing friendship round about her fall
shine, like solid gold and silver. It is nothing more than the sun's
Yes, thousands in a thousand different ways
Let no one misdeem me disloyal;
But what wad ye think? In a fortnight or less--
Above the crystal circlings white and clear;
They clothe their stolen dainties oer:
O let me 'noint them with the heaven's light!
Mourn'd as if yet thou wert a forester;--
Moistening sweet their speckled sides;
Oer nature's pleasant things; nor will it deem
Auld Scotland has a raucle tongue;
And meet so nearly, that with wings outraught,
Fate still has blest me with a friend,
Against that hell-born Circe. The crew had gone,
As still I do. Hast any mortal name,
And left his little footmarks, trample where he would.
O Ayr! my dear, my native ground,
As lady's laces, everlasting peas,
This cave was surely shaped out for the greeting
Nor look nor know each other's face;
The boat laid up, the voyage oer,
Of friendly voices had just given place
How thou wad prance, an' snore, an' skreigh,
While mony a kiss the seal imprest,
"You're one year older this important day."
As feels a dreamer what doth most create
Grim-rising o'er the rugged rock,
That old nurse stood beside her wondering,
And live as those who never die.--
Our feet were soft in flowers. There was store
Warm, tremulous, devout, psalterian.
A maiden fair I chanc'd to spy;
Oft-times upon the sudden she laugh'd out,
When call'd on to order the fun'ral direction,
The acorns near the old crow's nest
Thou'rt ay sae free informing me
Between the banks which bear the vine,
About old forests; while the willow trails
All the long day; save when he scantly lifted
When masons' mystic word an' grip
O lowse my right hand free, he says,
And splendidly mark'd with the story divine
Severe before me: persecuting fate!
And shut up green and open into gold.
Up which he had not fear'd the antelope;
Onward the tiger and the leopard pants,
As bird on wing to breast its eggs again;
So saying, this young soul in age's mask
To view these champions cheated of their fame,
With arch alacrity and conscious glee
Arches, and domes, and fiery galleries;
Maybe thou lets this fleshly thorn,
Then cannie, in some cozie place,
The auld guidmen, about the grace,
When Winter came and blasts did sigh,
When farmers dib the corn and laddies sow the rye.
Can't stand untouched to fill their husks with seeds,
O, dreary's the night wi' a crazy auld man!
Around, around, flew each sweet sound,
She'd something more than common on her mind;
"'Twas but yestreen, nae farther gaen,
To burn their nits, an' pou their stocks,
And by thy beauteous self I swear,
She sees her little bud put forth its leaves--
To clear conceiving: yet there ever rolls
But thou art on the bed of pain,
The Ocean o'er its boundary, and bears
His father said, that to a distant town
I know not what is there, yet something like to this.
As dry as the cinders that lay in his shop;
Deeming themselves predestined to a doom
Dancing their sleek hair into tangled curls;
For instance; there's yoursel' just now,
And had o' things an unco slight;
Nought but a lovely sighing of the wind
And the thyme it is wither'd, and rue is in prime."
He felt aloof the day and morning's prime--
These five and twenty simmers past,
For rest divine upon exalted couch
I own 'twas rash, an' rather hardy,
The tide of Generations shall roll on,
A wondrous lesson in thy silent face:
For if thou diest, my Love, I know not where to go."
To howl more loud, while the snow volley keeps
For why,--methinks I hear her voice
Time, scarcely noticed, turns his hair to grey,
Its loveliness increases; it will never
And run in mazes of the youngest hue
Achilles by the hair and bent his neck;
He sank supine beside the aching ghost.
Proclaim it the pride of the year.
In life and death to be the mark where Wrong
Old men, and babes, and loving friends,
How sing the splendour of the revelries,
She pats the pony, where or when
Where the gnat swarms fall and rise under evening's mellow skies,
How he who lone in Patmos banished,
Of flowers, peacocks, swans, and naiads fair.
And golden rods, and tansy running high
Yet wist na what her ail might be,
"O THOU, whose mighty palace roof doth hang
And sweetly tempt to taste them:
Pecking the hand that hovers o'er her mate:
His ancient, trusty, drouthy crony;
With speed put on your woodland dress,
Over the genius loving heart, a feeling
And the new morn she saw not: but in peace
Till ance you've heard my story.
O whistle, and I'll come to you, my lad.
By miscreants torn, who ne'er one sprig must wear:
Tut! Falsity hath snapt each bond,
Life's proud summits would'st thou scale?
O whistle, and I'll come to you, my lad,
But I'll get my plaid, an' out I'll steal,
There'll never be peace till Jamie comes hame!
And sorely puzzled are the twain,
As if she had not pomp subservient;
But Scot with Scot ne'er met so hot,
The struggle--vain, against the coiling strain
If I should be, where I no more can hear
Such utmost beauty? Alas, thou dost pine
Pitying each form that hungry Death hath marr'd,
He's just--nae better than he should be.
Till fate shall snap the brittle thread;
Playing in all her innocence of thought.
To see the laurel wreath, on high suspended,
The friend thou valuedst, I, the patron, lov'd;
Wi' lightsome heart I pu'd a rose,
Ye tiny elves that guiltless sport,
The dashing fount pour'd on, and where its pool
For there, lightly tripping amang the wild flowers,
And thinking most finds least to say.
Would court the muse that honoured thee,
Stood silent round the shrine: each look was chang'd
Ae day, as Death, that grusome carl,
Health, ay unsour'd by care or grief:
Her eloquence did breathe away the curse:
Much is the VIRGIN teased to shrive them free
A dear lov'd lad, convenience snug,
All but the bed where his old body lay,
And vow'd I was his dear lassie.
Witches' dread powers and fairy feats:
Of one who leans upon a closed book;
Attentive still to sorrow's wail,
Ye have left your souls on earth!
The mountain-howitzer, the broken road,
Soft dimpled hands, white neck, and creamy breast,
And to envisage circumstance, all calm,
For so delicious were the words she sung,
Of some arch'd temple door, or dusky colonnade.
That they may bind the moss in leafy nets.
From woodland echoes urging sharp replies.
At slaps the billies halt a blink,
The sunbeams scarce molest me with a smile,
Smiling in the clear well. My heart did leap
And thence was borne away to neighbouring hospital.
The trebly hundred triumphs!  and the day
Pride! bend thine eye from Heaven to thine estate,
And see the uncradled breeze, refreshed and strong,
And their eternal calm, and all that face,
And send us prying into the abyss,
That I for poor auld Scotland's sake
And love, and pleasure, and the ruddy strife
Is fortune's fickle Luna waning?
Ye've cost me twenty pair o' shoon
Away, thou heedless boy! prepare the spear:
Urging each lown to leave his sports in fear,
As I was a-wand'ring ae midsummer e'enin',
In subterranean damps, where the owl peeped,
Fame is the thirst of youth,--but I am not
For my sake this I beg it o' you.
Or, when auld Phoebus bids good-morrow,
O gin my love were yon red rose,
Keep back thine influence, and do not blind
So near those common folk; did not their shames
I court, I beg thy friendly aid,
As plainly in his ear, as the faint charm
Where the Etrurian Athens claims and keeps
And _there_ hath been thy bane; there is a fire
Plaining discrepant between sea and sky.
Hang matters of eternal weight:
Down the wide stairs a darkling way they found.--
Mountains above--Earth's, Ocean's plain below--
Feel curs'd and thwarted, when the liegeless air
And wi' the far-fam'd Grecian share
A fig for those by law protected!
Upon her cloot she coost a hitch,
But spleeny English, hanging, drowning.
The mirksome night did me enfauld,
And when my nightly couch I try,
I doubt na', frien', ye'll think ye're nae sheep-shank,
A lambkin in peace, but a lion in war,
"For who would trust the seeming sighs
That flowers would bloom, or that green fruit would swell
Oft have you seen a swan superbly frowning,
"The Guests are met, the Feast is set,--
Or a rapt seraph in a moonlight beam;
Now 'tis I see a canvass'd ship, and now
Of these first minutes? The unchariest muse
How kindly thou wouldst cheer me,
'Tis blue, and over-spangled with a million
And wait till sunshine comes again.
Though faction's scorn at first did shun
Of sacred ditamy, and poppies red:
Till suddenly a splendour, like the morn,
Boldly she sings and loud for half the day;
"Shut, shut those juggling eyes, thou ruthless man!
Was ne'er more bruited in men's minds than now
The nightingale keeps tweeting-churring round
Even in the passing of thine honey-moon,
While oer the distant fields more faintly creep
Well know their foe, and often try to slip;
Poor Jane, I've known her crying sneak to town,
Some mim-mou'd pouthered priestie,
Wi' ony blastit, moorland toop,
And Betty o'er and o'er has told
But this bruised heart that now bleeds in my breast,
What signifies his barren shine,
Which way to turn she cannot tell.
Dark as the parentage of chaos. Hark!
And the thyme it is wither'd, and rue is in prime.
Thus violate thy slumbrous solitude?
For old acquaintance Sue has kept your hat
The charm of this enchanted ground,
All that ideal Beauty ever blessed
Nor be my desolation; and, full oft,
On the blue fields of heaven, and then there crept
For Sunday's play he never makes excuse,
Are springin' o'er the gutters.
For large white plumes are dancing in mine eye.
If impiously an earthly realm I take.
Wi' kindly welcome, Jenny brings him ben;
A flowery band to bind us to the earth,
In Ayr, wag-wits nae mair can have a handle
For war's crushed myriads of his slaughtered foes.
Around me beeches and high chestnuts shed
Thou art my heaven, and I thine eremite:
And with the ills of Eld mine earlier years alloyed.
The Archangel's trump, not Glory's, must awake
Tell ev'ry social honest billie
And Dobbin's hay is eaten from the rack,
As I now hear them, in the fading light
Near and more the thunders roll;
Scarce can I scribble on; for lovely airs
There is a blessing in the air,
Few months of life has he in store,
But her tap-pickle maist was lost,
Is lawless law; for with a bloody hand
Though on his brow were graven lines austere,
Necessity of loving, have removed
And sisters live and know us not?
And press'd me by the hand: Ah! 'twas too much;
They're welcome till't for a' that
'Tis Solitude should teach us how to die;
This canopy mark: 'tis the work of a fay;
A strappan youth; he taks the Mother's eye;
But the old shepherd took him for the skin.
I am so oppress'd with joy! Why, I have shed
Quite sick of merit's rudeness,
And none did love him!--though to hall and bower
Pour into the wide hollows of my brain,
The fair, the brave, the vain, the wise,
The doctor at the casement shews,
And so the dawned light in pomp receive.
Nae doubt but they were fain o' ither,
Contending tempests on his naked head,
Though Fancy's casket were unlock'd to choose.
And joy and music pouring forth
Or the light air of Egypt's graceful Queen,
An' never think o' right an' wrang
On one white arm, and tenderly unclos'd,
He gathered revellers from far and near,
From Pyrrha's pebbles or old Adam's seed.
All delights of summer weather;
Of dolts to smooth, inlay, and clip, and fit,
Is of the tree no bolt of thunder cleaves,
What wives and wabsters see and feel.
To bear this hated doom severe?
On that best portion of a good man's life;
I lov'd her to the very white of truth,
That wee bit heap o' leaves an' stibble,
And feed on bitter fruits without accusing Fate.
Forbye turn-coats amang oursel,
And throw all old esteems away,
Tho' rough an' raploch be her measure,
Though it crawl on the curl of a queen.
His dust,--and lies it not her Great among,
Last May a braw wooer cam down the lang glen,
But still would seem to droop, to pine, to love.
For you sae douce, ye sneer at this,
And think human nature they truly describe;
I will luve thee still, my dear,
Wi' Death forgather'd by the way,
Stay, my charmer, can you leave me?
In pink and purple chequer, nor, up-pil'd,
But ne'er will Freedom seek this fated soil,
And night shuts up the lightsomeness of day,
Like those fair stars that twinkle in the heavens.
A fold of lawny mantle dabbling swims
He who of Rankine sang lies stiff and dead,
To see the little bees with coal black faces
I've taen the gold, an' been enrolled
And therefore did he take a trusty band
Upon the kidney bean that twines and towers
Frae morn to e'en its nought but toiling,
To gaze upon its crimping stream.
And Kenmure's lord's the bravest lord,
Auld chukie Reekie's  sair distrest,
In all his pedagogic powers elate,
The lustrous passion from a falcon-eye?--
Which every morn his fevered lip would greet,
The greensward all wracked is, bents dried up and dead.
Mysterious, wild, the far heard trumpet's tone;
Point after point did she discuss;
The oak from his foundation, and which spills
And school hours leave them half a day to play;
We'll dance, and sing, and rejoice, man;
Whose bugle?" he inquires: they smile--"O Dis!
Gold dome, and crystal wall, and turquois floor,
The heavens and earth in one to such a death
A fairy train appear'd in order bright:
A table, and, half anguish'd, threw thereon
The slave's spicy forests, and gold-bubbling fountains,
In passing harmless jokes bout beaus and that,
At tender eye-dawn of aurorean love:
Is still in bloom among the emerald grass,
But nocht in all revolving time
The nappy reeks wi' mantling ream,
My heart was ance as blythe and free
That at the root of the old tree
Disporting there like any other fly;
As if thine eye, high Poet! was not bent
She did so, but 'tis doubtful how and whence
But hear'st thou, laddie--there's my loof--
Wee, modest, crimson-tipped flow'r,
Ae fond kiss, and then we sever;
As gay and buxom as a summer's day:
O wives, be mindfu' ance yoursel
An' gude claymore down by his side,
A dove forlorn and lost with sick unpruned wing."
Spurning him from thy bosom to the skies--
Were her fair limbs, and like a common weed
Be they wise, be they foolish, is nothing of mine;
You've had your wish against my will
Thou now has got thy daddy's chair,
And then you're prey for Rob Mossgiel.
For sune as chance or fate had hush't 'em,
Her dizzen's done, she's unco weel:
Spring comes not with one shower,
And larger ones that thrum on ruder pipe
Fient haet o't wad hae pierc'd the heart
Till smiling Spring again appear.
Where once beneath a monarch's feet
The pith o' sense, and pride o' worth,
The sidelong view of swelling leafiness,
That happier days we never more must view:
'Twas the bewitching, sweet stown glance o' kindness.
His litter of smooth semilucent mist,
Your humble Poet signs an' prays
See, how she peels the skin an' fell.
Floats through the azure air--an island of the blest!
Sorrow the way to death; but patiently
An' till ye come--Your humble rervant,
"Whare I kill'd ane a fair strae death,
Which stir and sting the Soul with Hope that woos, then mocks.
Restless it rolls, now fixed, and now anon
Say rather, gaun as Premiers lead him,
A high-ruling Elder to wallow in wine!
When the full morning came, she had devised
We are not what we should be,--and to steel
Were emblem'd in the woof; with every shape
The golden hours, on angel wings,
From the dull yoke of her barbaric foes:
My hale and weel I'll tak a care o't,
With weather-beaten hat of rusty brown,
All mountain-rivers lost, in the wide home
Perch'd all around, on every tree,
I never saw the man whom you describe.
I pause and hardly know her face.
The tyrant Death, with grim control,
To fill the evening pail, bonny Mary O!
The banquet of my arms, my arbour queen,
Than under gospel colours hid be
With decency and law beneath his feet:
But ere the key-stane she could make,
Past each horizon of fine poesy;
Alternate follies take the sway;
The sun, when first he kist away the tears
The bursting tears my heart declare;
For over them was seen a free display
To show thy grace is great and ample;
Do old oaks thicken all the woods,
'Twas Johnny, Johnny, every where.
And when wit and refinement hae polish'd her darts,
My breast was calm as summer's sea
Or must thou trust Tradition's simple tongue,
Sweet be thy cradled slumbers! O'er the sea
Now safe the stately sawmont sail,
Fancy into belief: anon it leads
And Johnny makes the noise he loves,
Weel, since he has left me, may pleasure gae wi' him;
"Now wherefore thus, by day and night,
The flashing mass foams shaking the abyss;
Sapping a solemn creed with solemn sneer;
And I will meet thee there, bonny Mary O!
How specious heaven was changed to real hell.
My chief, amaist my only pleasure,
Wore a plaid, and was fu' braw,
O Thou! who pour'd the patriotic tide
But we'll ne'er stray for fau't o' light,
The penitent shower fell, as down he knelt
Sic game is now owre aften play'd.
For lack o' thee I've lost my lass,
To rive what Goth, and Turk, and Time hath spared:
And hither came, to see how dolorous fate
There sunk the greatest, nor the worst of men,
And kneeling on the sticks, she pray'd
No shepherd's pipe--Arcadian strains;
I hid my love in field and town
And now 'twas like all instruments,
In its own narrow being, but aspire
Some spumy, fiery, _ignis fatuus_ matter,
But he ne'er turn'd his back on his foe--or his friend,
Ye houlets, frae your ivy bow'r,
And th' half seen mossiness of linnets' nests.
Yet poortith a' I could forgive,
Until my head was dizzy and distraught.
And guide their plundering steps aright.
And flowers let us cull for Maria's cold bier.
Here's a health to ane I lo'e dear;
Sophist and sage, from no Athenian grove,
Towards a bowery island opposite;
Chants o'er the breathing flower;
Critics!--appall'd I venture on the name,
Dim, cloudy, sunk beneath the western wave;
I hurried with him to our orchard plot,
Where are the songs of Spring? Ay, where are they?
An' meek an' mim has view'd it,
Behint a kist to lie and sklent,
At the youth's slumber; while another took
That the sweet peace of rural morn's gone by.
And the foumart lay his crawin!
And with the owls began my song,
They are all here to-night, the whole blood-thirsty race!"
May fan the cool air gently o'er my rest;
O brightest! though too late for antique vows,
Or Poland, wha had now the tack o't;
To the miller himsel', and his three bonny daughters.
And Madeline asleep in lap of legends old.
O'er hill and dale she flew, man;
In tall grass, by fountain head,
Wi' the burn stealing under the lang yellow broom:
Among the bushes half leafless, and dry;
Poor Susan moans, poor Susan groans,
Then happy lie, for blest am I;
Thee more than mortal? and that so supine
To crush Common sense for her sins,
O had I known as then joy had left the paths of men,
And dire the discord Langside saw,
Are dyed as rusty as his napless hat.
Ere a lean bat could plump its wintery skin,
An' saying, aye or no's they bid him,
And sat me down, and took a mouthed shell
In frost and cold though lame he's forced to go--
That death has murder'd Johnny!
And I the world, nor wish, nor scorn,
Not willing to lose time or toil,
Responsive to sylphs, in the moon beamy air.
I fear they'll now mak mony a stammer,
The westlin wind blaws loud an' shrill;
"Dost thou not mark a gleaming through the tide,
But Charlie gat the spring to pay,
Riding the springy branches of an elm.
And eyes the simple rustic hind,
Some social join, and leagues combine;
And where thou meet'st thy mother's friend
How oft, in spirit, have I turned to thee
If smiles, if dimples, tongues for ardour mute,
The stubborn canvas for my voyage prepar'd--
And soul-ennobling bards heroic ditties sung.--
Oh, Victor unsurpassed in modern song!
Like life whose essence is its friends.
And runs no scores on tavern screens to clear.
Gie' a' the faes o' Scotland's weal
Just sh---- in a kail-blade, and send it,
And raging bend the naked tree:
He heeds or feels no more the ruthless critic's rage!
To keep her from the dripping grass,
Whyles glitter'd to the nightly rays,
How true she warped the moss, to form a nest,
Near lav'rock-height she jumpit,
Then patronize them wi' your favour,
"To-day we purpose, ay, this hour we mount
All chaff of custom, wipe away all slime
'Twas with slow, languid paces, and face hid
Save from one gradual solitary gust
Have become indolent; but touching thine,
Peona's busy hand against his lips,
Like shades in love and death's oblivion lost;
Dame Life, tho' fiction out may trick her,
Close shamed Elysium's gates, my shade shall seek for none .
Without some stir of heart, some malady;
Must take its hue from this alone;
These words awoke the stranger of dark tresses:
Like to a warrior's destiny! I love
She talk'd, she smil'd, my heart she wyl'd;
"The bridegroom may forget the bride
For half-starv'd snarling curs a dainty feast:
No cloud, no relique of the sunken day
I ken't her heart was a' my ain;
Seek Heaven for help, and barefit skelp
Did nations combat to make _One_ submit?
These things which happen. Rightly have they done:
"How ill she is," said he, "I may not speak,
By shepherds is forgotten, when, in June,
And roar every note of the danm'd.
Was five-and-twenty days begun,
The tears and praises of all time, while thine
That which distinguished the gender
Next follow'd Courage, with his martial stride,
And a good south wind sprung up behind,
Of turf and slanting branches: who could tell
And at the last, these men of cruel clay
The tongue o' the trump to them a';
That grandchild's cap will do to-morrow--
To view each loved one blotted from Life's page,
And, like the highest, bribes the maidens' love.
Of light in light! delicious poisoner!
Luve for luve is the bargain for me,
Before my heedless footsteps stirr'd, and stirr'd
Three years a wanderer, often have I view'd,
Of all sweet herbs that searching eye could cull:
Behold her panting in the forest grass!
Which from the birth of Monarchy hath rung
Wind into Thetis' bower by many a pearly stair;
And how he star'd and stammer'd,
And birks extend their fragrant arms
Swept space as shoreless as eternity.
Sweet sounds rose slowly thro' their mouths
The ploughman sung his rustic lay
Who, blindfold to its fond caresses,
Drooping its beauty o'er the watery clearness,
She could ca' us nae waur than we are.
She gies the herd a pickle nits,
"Come hither, hither, my staunch yeoman,
Sense of the gnawing fire at heart and brain.
Colossal copyist of deformity--
A laughing school-boy, without grief or care,
Till too, too soon, the glowing west
Nature's soft pillow in a wakeful rest.
His teeth they chatter, chatter still.
The chuckling linnet its five young unborn,
It was na the blast brought the tear in my e'e;
And he is all in travelling trim,
Because he knows, a frightful fiend
O take this world away from me;
Close to the ground lark's guarded nest
As men, as Christians too, renown'd,
And cruelly left him to sorrow, and anguish.
Ne'er mind how fortune waft an' warp;
His bones are consumed, and his life-blood is dried,
Her banks an' braes, her dens an' dells,
With brighter eyes and slow amenity,
To please the mob they hide the little giv'n."
Which wild remembrance, in each little town,
Their baaing vanities, to browse away
She'll teach you, wi' a reekin' whittle,
And to strike me a light I sat down.
That music in itself, whose sounds are song,
Who knelt, with joined hands and piteous eye,
Thus brief; then with beseeching eyes she went
And ilka bird sang o' its love;
An' thou live, thou'll steal a naigie:
But first, before you see heaven's glory,
With its hollow trees like pulpits I shall never see again,
But lest he learn the callan tricks,
Mutter'd, like tempest in the distance brew'd,
For Europe's flowers long rooted up before
"Where all this long night you have been,
Wi' twa pund Scots ('twas a' her riches),
With an immaculate charm which cannot be defaced.
And bids each be sleep's fearful guest.
All as ye pass swell out the monstrous truth,
There's not a hill in all the view,
Lo, there she goes, unpitied and unblest
Can you--but, Miss, I own I have my fears,
She lets thee to wit that she has thee forgot,
Glow'd through, and wrought upon the muffling dark
But just thy step a wee thing hastit,
So deemed the Childe, as o'er the mountains he
The human soul that through me ran;
Rough ashes sat he for his soul's reprieve,
And have their Country's Marbles nought to say?
Lo! while slow carried through the pitying crowd,
And snatch thee from the morning; o'er the main
Kirk-Alloway seem'd in a bleeze;
In swells unmitigated, still doth last
And clings to thoughts now better far removed!
By this, the sun was out o' sight,
Desiring Glenriddel to yield up the spoil;
His first attack, wide-waving to and fro
Crowd the blank field to thatch time-weathered barns,
Blazing Hyperion on his orbed fire
"Sure some sweet name thou hast, though, by my truth,
The fields grow old and common things,
His rags regimental they flutter'd so gaudy,
May never guid luck be their fa'!
O God, let me what's good pursue,
A little, upright, pert, tart, tripping wight,
The tickl'd ear no heart-felt raptures raise;
"I hae been a devil the feck o' my life;
The waken'd lav'rock warbling springs
And from beneath a sheltering ivy leaf
There's very few know where they breed,
Were bound to stakes like kye, man;
And when they smiled because he deemed it near,
I come to give thee such reward
The beams in blossom with their spots of jet
Of the wide doors disclos'd a place unknown
It's thought the gudes were stown.
Spying the time-worn flaws in ev'ry arch;--
Oh! may they still of transport dream,
When I forget thee! Willie Creech,
And everything inspired by thee grow beautifully good.
When they were braided, and her proud array
A tinge of years, but breathes the flame with which 'twas wrought.
Than the present, fair nymphs, I was blest with from you,
Yet still I feel immortal! O my love,
And modelled it within with wood and clay;
As if every pane in the window was broke;
All were re-animated. There arose
I dreamt I saw thee, robed in purple flakes,
The flow'rs sprang wanton to be prest,
At ev'n, when beans their fragrance shed
In gentle phrase, then bid me sing to you--
Reflects the meek-eyed Genius of the place,
Feeding on thy sweet cheek!  while thy lips are
May to Patrician rights aspire!
So fast out of his heart, I thought
A little rill of scanty stream and bed--
Your much indebted, humble servant.
And whisper oer, in terror's way,
At houses, men, and common light, amazed.
That we might look into a forest wide,
Of the old bards to mighty deeds: his plans
The staff I yet remember which upbore
Think what passed the other night--
Make not your rosary of yew-berries,
Of happiness, to when upon the moors,
At length he looked around about,
It soothed each to be the other by;
Churches built to please the priest.
To guard or draw, or wick a bore,
When _here_ your favour is the actor's lot,
And through his side the last drops, ebbing slow
When day, expiring in the west,
No joy to see a neighbouring house, or stray
So kept me stedfast in that airy trance,
Fu' loud the wind blaws frae the ferry;
Ah, happy she! to 'scape from him whose kiss
"My brother John was forced to go,
Withheld me first; and then decrees of fate;
Exhales in mists to heaven. Aye, the count
With rosy maid he tries to joke and play,--
Why have ye left your forest haunts, why left
And his twin-sister sleeping in their bower,
Then sleep in silence evermair!
Their royal name low in the dust!
Teach us, here, the way to find you,
And feels a rapture in her breast
I rule them as I ought, discreetly,
The mere commingling of passionate breath,
Sic famous twa should disagreet,
An' could na preach for thinkin' o't.
Old Angela was feeling for the stair,
With the slow move of time,--sluggish and weary
Aften hast thou vow'd that death
Then water-kelpies haunt the foord,
And wipe the dust from off the idle name
Love's standard on the battlements of song.
But he, poor man! is wretched made,
Whence could be seen, direct, a golden gate,
O pale, pale now, those rosy lips
So, fairy-thing, it shall have lullabies
Alas, for Tully's voice, and Virgil's lay,
Among the stranger birds they feed,
Stumbling o'er recollections; now we clap
My friends forsake me like a memory lost;
The Heavens and the Earth, were manifest:
"Love! thou art leading me from wintry cold,
Or tore, with noble ardour stung,
It loosens something at my chest;
That but one night had wrought this flowery spell;
Coming with softest rustle through the trees;
This wayward, loveless heart, it would be thine:
But bitter, daudin' showers hae wat it,
Two insulated phantoms of the brain:
In silver hemmings skirts the purple east,
So through the crystal polish, liquid fine,
Of the loud hills shakes with its mountain-mirth,
The sheltering rushes whistling o'er thy head,
And even since, and now, fair Italy!
But the pride of the spring in the Craigie-burn-wood
For while I muse, the lance points slantingly
Are gone in tender madness, and anon,
Of a fresh woodland alley, never ending;
Thine be the volumes, Jessy fair,
But smash them! crash them a' to spails!
Nor mark'd with any sign or charactery--
Of merchant-dukes?  the momentary dews
Sir John in his castle without leave or law
Sad case it was, as you may think,
"But one, whose first wish is the wish to be good,
I said and took him by the arm--
A gate, I fear, I'll dearlie rue;
He sinks into thy depths with bubbling groan--
In the nook, the large burdock grows near the green willow;
I hear, but all is strange and new:
When the great deity, for earth too ripe,
Farewell to the Highlands, farewell to the North,
L--d, man, were ye but whyles whare I am,
Of Hero's tears, the swoon of Imogen,
Unseen is Yanina, though not remote,
Or did misfortune's bitter storms
And danc'd, and sung, and sigh'd, and swore,
So that the waving of his plumes would be
For daily with my growing store
It was a poet's house who keeps the keys
When the bees hummed, and chair by winter fire;
With much to read and little to divert,
But from delay the summer calms were past.
Who dreams of sorry luck, and sore dismay;
Stand forth, an' tell yon Premier youth,
Kerroughtree's laird, an' a' that,
Of our own Soul turn all our blood to tears,
O silly blind body, O dinna ye see?
And for them many a weary hand did swelt
What are the stars? There is the sun, the sun!
While the life beats in my bosom,
"Whence came ye, merry Damsels! whence came ye!
O first-born on the mountains! by the hues
Make the gales you waft around her
Such as the slightest breath of air might scatter;
Ye shall for ever live and love, for all
We'll mak our maut, we'll brew our drink,
Trees old and young, sprouting a shady boon
I restless lie frae e'en to morn,
Though fate said--a hero shall perish in light;
Which never loses though it doth defer--
Before him Doon pours all his floods;
Holds the gate open till she passes through,
But oh! she's an heiress,--auld Robin's a laird,
Begun in gentleness die so away.
Lest neebors might say I was saucy;
O mandate, glorious and divine!
An' some their New Light fair avow,
Though prest wi' care and sunk in woe,
Stand anxious: see! behold!"--This clamant word
While painted woods around my rambles be
All that I would have sought, and all I seek,
Old rusted anchors, helmets, breast-plates large
Antagonizing Boreas,--and so vanish'd.
And gentle the fall of the soft vernal shower,
I said and held him by the arm,
"No storied urn nor animated bust;"
Till it is hush'd and smooth! O unconfin'd
And after youthful follies ran,
Here are sweet peas, on tip-toe for a flight:
One minute past, and Lethe-wards had sunk:
Rich opal domes were seen, on high upheld
They could not sit at meals but feel how well
This tangled thread, and wind it to a clue.
Or your more dreaded hell to state,
Ilk wimpling burn, ilk crystal spring,
That's laid in the bed beyond thee!
To commune with those orbs, once more I rais'd
But gie me just a true good fellow,
I hope we bardies ken some better
I sing: if these mortals, the critics, should bustle,
O'er head we see the jasmine and sweet briar,
With an Immortal's patience blending:--Vain
Is a pervading Life and Light,--so shown
Lamia beheld him coming, near, more near--
Are we sae foughten an' harass'd
Before they fix'd upon a surest way
He flapp'd towards the sound. Alas, no charm
Assyria--Greece--Rome--Carthage--what are they?
Blythe Morning lifts his rosy eye,
Stood full blown, for the God to enter in.
Lowp, sing, and lave your pretty limbies,
They're no herd's ballats, Maro's catches;
Full well thou know'st I love thee, dear!
Where every science--every nobler art--
But nay, my heart is far too glad;
I stood upon the shore of a mighty glorious sea.
The Convent's white walls glisten fair on high:
Ere they would grate their feelings wi' the view
Her brother kiss'd her too, and knelt adown
Dian had chaced away that heaviness,
A Traitor only fell beneath the feud:
Whae'er shall say I wanted grace
They rise and vanish in oblivious host,
And if my voice break forth, 'tis not that now
Yet here and there some daring mountain-band
Your deeds proved so loyal in hot-bloody trial--
Like a stalking horse stand on the green.
And this is sure thine other softling--this
A thousand men in troubles wide and dark:
His senses had swoon'd off: he did not heed
The ace an' wale of honest men:
Nor low Ambition's honours lost,
Her bonnet floating on the top espied;
An' cleed her bairns, man, wife, an wean,
Tenderly her fancy from its maiden snow,
Their woes gone by, and both to heaven upflown,
And weary, o'er the moor, his course does homeward bend.
An' where is our king's lord lieutenant,
But loyalty truce! we're on dangerous ground,
Wish'd unison between the pair,
Lay, half asleep, in grass and rushes cool,
Jean slips in twa wi' tentie e'e;
That gars the notes of discord squeel,
And see me pay the bishop's mare.
To look on One, whose dust was once all fire,--
(Hey, and the rue grows bonnie wi' thyme),
I saw or dreamed of such,--but let them go,--
Pardon me, airy planet, that I prize
Our Spirits to the size of that they contemplate.
When Ballantyne befriends his humble name,
Whose passing-bell may ere the midnight toll;
Come weal, come woe, we'll gather and go,
The mill sails on the heath a-going.
And tell me thou bring'st me my Willie the same.
By the dusk curtains:--'twas a midnight charm
Unshaken rushing on where'er their Chief may lead.
_Her_ lips are red, _her_ looks are free,
But boundless oceans roaring wide
The cottager when coming home from plough
Of Bessy at her spinning-wheel?
My bardship here, at your levee,
No matter where they go or where they dwell
Tell him o' mine an' Scotland's drouth,
Just opening on its thorny stem;
Heard her light, lively tones in Lady's bower,
Stood trembling creatures. I beheld the wreck;
Here woman's voice is never heard: apart,
Dearer than these, than all beside,
From the roots of his hair there shall start
An' ken ye what Meg o' the Mill has gotten?
A thought resigned with pain, when from the mast
His Bible first in place; from worth and age
For, indeed, 'tis a sweet and peculiar pleasure,
Oh! smile on me, my little lamb!
Of angry powers: there are deities
My shins, my lane, I there sit roastin',
Round my fire-side, and haply there discover
Memory's affections in the lists recall.
The gathering floods burst o'er the distant plains;
Buds lavish gold; or ye, whose precious charge
Let me, no vagrant insect, rove!
That I, henceforth, would be rhyme-proof
O leave them, Muse! O leave them to their woes;
She pops their dish behind the door.
Of sudden tempests stirs the forest leaves
Hodge, in his waggon, marks the wondrous tongue,
Leaps oer the orchard hedge and knarls the grass.
And History, with all her volumes vast,
And thou, O Trouble?--Nothing can suppose,
Spare't for their sakes wha aften wear it,
Opened again, and from without, in shone
Farewell, a mother's blessing dear!
Wide o'er the swelling streams: and constantly
The scatter'd coveys meet secure;
Even for thy tomb a garland let it be--
That nought less sweet, might call my thoughts away,
To mortal steps, before thou cans't be ta'en
Frae less to mair it gaed to sticks;
Feast on, and meanwhile I will let thee know
Some bitter o'er the flowers its bubbling venom flings.
Thy goodness constantly we prove,
As loss or guerdon of a glorious lot;--
His heart it was so full of glee,
And mind their labours wi' an eydent hand,
But yet the light that led astray
In loving bleeze they sweetly join,
And this he fondled with his happy cheek
Revive the dying tones of minstrelsy,
All kink about like skeins of thread
Wi' mornings blythe and e'enings funny
And looks as with the wild-bewildered gaze
Of torrents, where he listeneth, to the vines
But kindness, sweet kindness, in the fond sparkling e'e,
But tho' my back be at the wa',
Lone Mother of dead Empires! and control
Worthiest of God, the Holy and the True!
Till noon we silently sail'd on
Dissolve in pause--and sentimental tears;
May prudence protect her frae evil!
Is full of blessings. Therefore let the moon
The heart that loved her; 'tis her privilege,
But most the modern Pict's ignoble boast,
--And thou'st got leave to spend an hour!
Should be thy portion, with what healing thoughts
Could wander in the mazy forest-house
But for one moment in the tedious hours,
When the chill rain begins at shut of eve,
His worthy fam'ly far and near,
A little cloud would move across the blue.
A fine pacing horse wi' a clear chained bridle,
Here's Kenmure's health in wine;
I'm here a pillar in thy temple,
Een nature's dwellings far away from men,
What pipes and timbrels? What wild ecstasy?
Till on the deep lake's very bank it hings.
A mad-pursuing of the fog-born elf,
Heights which appear as lovers who have parted
The bride from home at blushing shut of day,
Yet for awhile the mariners forbore,
Such darling essence, wherefore may I not
Reverse of her decree, than in the abyss
To which I'm clear to gi'e my aith.
And heard great Bab'lon's doom pronounc'd by Heaven's command.
I'll set me down and sing and spin,
Since men knew nor rent nor leases.
May dool and sorrow be his lot!
She dies at the thinnest cloud; her loveliness
What sorrow thou canst feel; for I am sad
An' justifies that ill opinion,
The earth is glad: the merry lark has pour'd
For him suspend the dashing oar,
There's not a house within a mile.
The cauldness o' thy heart's the cause
Pry 'mong the stars, to strive to think divinely:
Fruit, foliage, crag, wood, cornfield, mountain, vine,
Gaul's locust host, and earth from fellest foemen purge
Oh! had you known her in her softer hour,
The sunshine's gone, and now an April evening
Mourn, ye wee songsters o' the wood;
The schoolboy hears and brushes through the trees
Never on such a night have lovers met,
Few hearts like his, with virtue warm'd,
When Athens' armies fell at Syracuse,
They still keep piping in their honey dreams,
Cauld blaws the wind frae east to west,
Juno's proud birds are pecking pearly grain:
Stick after stick did Goody pull,
And mony a ane that I could tell,
In Spenser's halls he strayed, and bowers fair,
Whose is that noble dauntless brow?
Flocks play, trees wave, streams flow, the mountain-fir
Fair is the morn in flow'ry May,
I miss the prospect far and wide
Yet look as ye were na lookin' at me.
His withered Centinel,  Duenna sage!
The winds at night had made a rout,
How can ye chant, ye little birds,
Burn in him with so proud a breath,
And hoarsely croaked the glossy crow
In blood from stinging whip;--with hollow eyes
Amid such neighbourhoods to dwell.
But hark!--that heavy sound breaks in once more,
I've sent you here, by Johnie Simson,
The wild Scandinavian boar issu'd forth
Wad haud the Lothians three in tackets,
Then the events of this wide world I'd seize
It's leaving thee, my bonnie Mary.
And ye'll crack your credit wi' mae nor me.
Thus gentle Lamia judg'd, and judg'd aright,
For still, the more he works, the more
And, being hidden, laugh at their out-peeping;
"What is there in thee, Moon! that thou shouldst move
Scoop'd from its trembling sisters of mid-sea,
An' there tak up your stations;
Poor, paltry slaves! yet born 'midst noblest scenes--
I hae been joyfu' gath'rin' gear;
The leaves that make the softest bed:
When the prow sweeps into a midnight cove.
To make me desolate? whence came the strength?
In vain should such example be; if they,
Their tricks and craft have put me daft.
Upon my wild conjecturing: truth had come
Upon the first toll of his passing-bell,
But ah! she is so constant and so kind.
Who would not be so prison'd? but, fond elf,
"O Arethusa, peerless nymph! why fear
Scenes so abhorrent to my heart!
The Star-Queen's crescent on her marriage night:
Can make a ladder of the eternal wind,
An' she has twa sparkling roguish een.
It's aye the cheapest lawyer's fee,
Proud to behold him in his country's eye.
To fret at myriads of earthly wrecks.
Of thee hereafter.--Ev'n amidst my strain
Over the darkest, lushest blue-bell bed,
And I sought him, he never came.
And groans, that rage of racking famine spoke,
As though she were reclining in a bed
Who make poor _will do_ wait upon _I should_--
Why ev'n the Worm at last disdains her shattered cell!
Oh! who would not die with the brave!
For from the day the tidings reached her door
He ever found his picture frames adorn:
An' echoes back return the shouts:
The milk of conquest yet within the dome
These things, with all their comfortings, are given
The hares were hirplin down the furs,
Endymion, weep not so! Why shouldst thou pine
All fix'd on me their stony eyes
The canniest gate, the strife is sair;
For gold the merchant ploughs the main,
To grace so plain a tale--this lowly lay of mine.
She wanders by yon spreading tree;
To see his poor auld mither's pot
Jockey's heart is still at hame.
"To the dark cave, the goblins' hall,
The mountain, and the deep and gloomy wood,
For as the sunset peeps into a wood
Thou'rt to love and heaven sae dear,
Secure in guarded coldness, he had mixed
I turned about and heard her cry,
And spread its snares licentious far and wide;
And all the tribute of my heart returns,
The gulf is thick with phantoms, but the Chief
Still nobler wealth hast thou in store--
The tearful tribute of a broken heart.
His lady's purpose; and he scarce could brook
As though a tongueless nightingale should swell
And little chats that in bean stalks will lie
I will not wind a lang conclusion,
And those sad eyes were spiritual and clear:
My curse upon your whunstane hearts,
Our pillows; and the fresh to-morrow morn
Neath ivied oak; and mutter to the storm,
His head upon a tuft of straggling weeds,
The fabled Hebrew Wanderer bore;
"I am a shadow now, alas! alas!
To toll me back from thee to my sole self!
Made a fit roofing to this nest of woe.
I, for their thoughtless, careless sakes,
From his old teacher's wrinkled countenance,
The sun that did behind them peer?
He holds him with his glittering eye--
Whom will you send to London town,
Such is the lurcher that assists Bumtagg.
But those of Saturn's vintage; mouldering scrolls,
'Twas noble, Sir; 'twas like yoursel',
The plover loves the mountains;
The those whose bliss, whose beings hang upon him,
For though I scorn Oceanus's lore,
But thou canst.--Be thou therefore in the van
And fast she holds her idiot boy.
Wha represent our brughs an' shires,
Old darkness from his throne: 'twas like the sun
O mem'ry! spare the cruel throes
Be changed, that was so fair to view,
And canst thou leave me thus for pity?
Look at their watch and tell before he asks.
Come join, ye Nature's sturdiest bairns,
Such a parcel of rogues in a nation.
Which, at this season, with their unripe fruits,
And where the robin lives, the village guest,
The paltry prize is hardly worth the cost:
The universal plagues of life below,
Dungeons and thrones, which the same hour refilled,
Our monarch's hindmost year but ane
The old owls might have hallooed if they durst,
His gory chest unveils life's panting source;
Dark muffled, viewed the dreary plain;
What's done we partly may compute,
Up from behind the molehill jumps the hare,
This boasted honour turns away,
Peona, his sweet sister: of all those,
--Where art thou gone my own dear child?
While his bow'd head seem'd list'ning to the Earth,
And then she died on him she could not save.
Tyrants and Tyrants' slaves?--the fires of Death,
Speak! roar! shout! yell! ye sleepy Titans all.
Of triumph calm, and hymns of festival
Who now shall lead thy scattered children forth,
It's a sign they're no nice o' recruits,
And when they rear'd, the elfish light
What they've been doing all this time,
An appetite: a feeling and a love,
Though they may gang a kennin' wrang,
For they come far by wind and tide.
As soon the rooted oaks would fly
Sweet as yon hawthorn's blossom,
The Commonwealth of Kings--the Men of Rome!
And ye may gie my brother James
A melancholy spirit well might win
Seem'd like a poll of ivy in the teeth
The steyest brae thou wad hae fac't it;
I hear a wheel thrum i' the neuk,
Fell thick and hung pearls on the old sorrel mane
His saul has ta'en some other way,
"And Johnny, mind you tell us true."
Aye aye, said the cobbler, we'll conquer him now.
In summer luxury,--he has never done
From bank to bank the waterstrife is spread;
Rent by no ravage save the gentle plough;
She linger'd still. Meantime, across the moors,
Where Beauty cannot keep her lustrous eyes,
"This cheers our fallen house: come to our friends,
Oft made Hyperion ache. His palace bright
To bury this poor thorn for ever.
The wintry sun the day has closed,
Mnemosyne was straying in the world;
Sir, as your mandate did request,
You save fair Jessie from the grave--
For clamour, when the golden palace door
Her self the dirtiest slut in all the town.
Ethereal, flush'd, and like a throbbing star
And Evening's tears are tears of joy:
Ev'n as he is, cauld in his graff,
Four years each day with daily bread was blest,
I mean your ingle-side to guard
Not for to preach, but tell his simple story:
Or mus'd where limpid streams once hallow'd well,
Or fallen in Whiggish hands, man:
Then paints the ruin'd maid, and their distraction wild?
At Wallace' name, what Scottish blood
The muffled murtherer  of Charles
We were the first that ever burst
Ye haz'lly shaws and briery dens!
Such follying before thee--yet she had,
Through which I wandered to eternal truth.
He rubs his hands and shows how Rodney beat.
Riches denied, Thy boon was purer joys,
And fain would blush, if blush they could, for shame.
And such the frenzy, whose convulsion blinds
No wife to be teazing, no bairns to be fed,
I've seen the oppressor's cruel smile
Where'er that place be priests ca' hell,
Till death did on him ca', man;
Earth's troubled waters for a purer spring.
For their sweet queen: when lo! the wreathed green
That gart my heart-strings tingle:
And, after looking round the champaign wide,
All thy fond plighted vows--fleeting as air!
Of dulcet instruments came charmingly;
How dowf and dowie now they creep;
The mountain-moss by scorching skies imbrowned,
Of kind and passionate looks; to count, and count
Cart ruts and horses' footings scarcely yield
A thing to be desired it cannot be;
_Thou!_ formed to eat, and be despised, and die,
Fever'd his high conceit of such a bride,
